# RSU 5 Board of Directors — Meeting Minutes
**Date:** November 18, 2009  
**Source:** [November 18, 2009](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/d17dea53-359d-46ac-94dc-cf3b4604924a)  
**PDF:** [2009-11-18.pdf](https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v1665588388/rsu5org/ba9vmt6bedkpgcilvfxm/2009-11-18.pdf)  
**Retrieved:** 2026-03-16  
**OCR processed:** 2026-03-16 10:13  

---

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting
Wednesday, November 18, 2009 — 6:30 P.M.
Freeport High School Cafeteria
Meeting Minutes
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action, either to
approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the January 13, 2009 meeting).
MEMBERS PRESENT: Kristen Dorsey, Eric Dube, Cori Holt, Jennifer Kaplan, Nelson Larkins,
John Morang, Beth Parker, Elizabeth Peters, Laurie Poissonnier
MEMBERS ABSENT: Brenda Kielty, Melinda McKechnie
CALLED TO ORDER:
Chairperson Larkins called the meeting to order at 6:35 P.M.
3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:
4. CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:

A. VOTED: (1) To approve the Minutes of the October 28, 2009 meeting of the Board of
Directors. (Morang — Parker) (9 — 0)

B. VOTED: (2) To approve the Minutes of the November 4, 2009 meeting of the Board of
Directors as amended by adding the following sentence under 3. HIN1 Report: During the
discussion over the H1N1 Flu Clinics there was conversation about the need to review our
policies for committee formation and communication to the Board on action items that was taken
from the committees. (Holt — Poissonnier) (9 — 0)

5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:
Addition of 9. B. Update on Education Committee Session
6. GOOD NEWS & RECOGNITION:

A. Report from Student Government: None

B. Let's Go/5-2-1-0 Goes to School Project: Dr. Victoria Rogers, a pediatrician at the Barbara
Bush Children's Hospital and the Medical Director for 5-2-1-0 Goes to School presented an
overview of the program and the great work taking place in the schools to help children
understand the importance of good nutrition and activity.

7. UNFINISHED BUSINESS:

A. Community Forum on Phase 1: District Strategic Plan: Superintendent Welsh provided an
overview of the process up to this point. Community members from the three towns provided
feedback on each section of the Plan, including the Mission and Vision statements. Feedback
from the forum and any additional feedback received by December 2" will be taken into
consideration. Formal adoption of the full Strategic Plan is anticipated for December 9". After

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 11/18/09

Page 2 of 5
adoption of the Plan staff will work to create a list of indicators of student achievement and the
Finance Sub-Committee will work on the financial indicators.
B. VOTED: (3) To revise the 2009-2010 school calendar to adjust the last day of school for
Pownal Elementary School to June 10, 2010. (Dube — Poissonnier) (9 — 0)

8. REPORTS FROM ADMINISTRATORS/EDUCATION COMMITTEES:

A. Fall Sports Season Update: Crag Sickels provided an overview of the fall sports season
including participation numbers, offerings, awards received, and athletic trainer services.
Mr. Sickels also provided an update on High School Sports.net.

9. Superintendent'S REPORT:

A. Nursing services update: Superintendent Welsh reported she met with the school nurses and it
was agreed to place an ad for LPN's. Three applications were received from RN's certified by
the Department of Education and one started on Tuesday. This is a pilot year to see what the
impact to students and finances will be. Superintendent Welsh appreciates school nurses Brenda
Herling and Brenda White for stepping up and helping out.

B. Update on Education Committee Session: Superintendent Welsh reported she attended the
Education Committee's meeting on Tuesday with the Commissioner. Dr. Welsh had the
opportunity to speak to the committee about three ways to improve the consolidation law by
including an opt out clause, discontinuing BVR, and a common election date for Board
members.

The Race to the Top grant was also discussed at the Education Committee meeting. The grant
could bring $75 million into education. The Commissioner will know by January if Maine can
apply, and if so, it would then be open up to school districts.
Superintendent Welsh reported the Governor is expected to issue a curtailment order this Friday.
Reductions to the RSU could total $658,000. Spreadsheets will be available to districts on Friday
outlining reduction amounts.

10. PUBLIC COMMENTS:

Hank Ogilby, CEA President, noted the High School has been without a nurse for 2 2 months. The

previous nurse left because of the workload. Mr. Ogilby asked the Board that whichever way they go

with the position to please treat them as a full member of the professional staff.

Brenda White, Mast Landing and Morse Street School nurse, talked about her concern of there not

being adequate nursing services at the schools. Mrs. White asked the Board to become informed

about the nursing needs in the schools due to chronic conditions and to consider how we value and
pay employees.
11. NEW BUSINESS:

A. Voted: (3) To extend the contract of the Superintendent of Schools for RSU No. 5 and authorize

the Chair and Vice-Chair to negotiate salary and benefits. (Poissonnier — Paker) (9 — 0)

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 11/18/09
Page 3 of 5
12. FINANCIAL REPORT:
A. RSU No. 5 Financial Statement November 12, 2009
13. COMMUNICATIONS (Consent Agenda)
14. BOARD COMMENTS (Reports from Sub-Committees):

A. Communications — Betsy Peters reported the Committee met on November 12" to discuss
communications to support the Strategic Plan process. Parents, staff and community members
were notified via email, phone and flier. Parents, staff and the public that attended the September
14" meeting were emailed the plan in draft status which is also available on the website.

HIN1 and the flu was discussed and we are tracking this information. Absences fall into one of
three categories. The state requires schools to report when absenteeism hits 15% or greater.
When 15% occurs a letter is sent home to parents discussing mitigation techniques. Durham
Elementary, Morse Street School and Freeport Middle School parents received the letter last
week.

Naming the RSU is on track. Superintendent Welsh met with various teachers. There will be
round tables on December 3“ to review student suggestions. Results of that meeting will be
forwarded to the public and Board in January

Invitations will be sent to the five representatives of the three towns to join the Board on
December 9" for a conversation about improving the consolidation law.

C. Finance: Eric Dube reported the Finance Committee met on November 18". The RSU warrant
was signed. The Facility Committee presented the 5 Year Capital Plan. The Board will review
the plan at the December 9" meeting. Rich DeGrandpre, a member of the Facility Committee
noted the Town Council will be discussing the field study at their December 1“ meeting. The
subsidy curtailment was discussed. The Finance Committee will begin working on the financial
indicators for the Strategic Plan.

D. Negotiations — Nelson Larkins reported negotiations are still ongoing with the three groups.
Teacher negotiations are scheduled for Thursday evening.

E. Policy — The Policy Committee met on November 4" and November 9". At the November 4”
meeting the committee created a Board self-evaluation tool. The Board members were asked to
review the self-evaluation and provide feedback to the committee by December 2™.

At the November 9" meeting policy packet 10-2 was finalized for 2' Read/adoption and packet
10-3 was finalized for 1‘' Read at the November 18" Board meeting. No feedback was received
on either packet. Policy packet 10-4 was prepared for draft feedback. This packet contains
policies regarding homework, graduation standards, educational records, and English Language
Learners. These policies were reviewed by administrators with input from staff prior to
presentation to the policy committee. The next Policy Committee meeting will be held on
December 18".

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 11/18/09
Page 4 of 5
F. Jennifer Kaplan announced her resignation from the RSU No. 5 Board of directors, effective at
the end of the Wednesday, December 9"" Board meeting.
Voted: (4) To declare a Board vacancy and direct the Superintendent to advertise the vacancy
for appointment on December 9, 2009. (Dube — Peters) (9 — 0)
15. PERSONNEL:
None
16. POLICY REVIEW:
A. Policies Packet 10-1 was distributed for policy book update.
B. Policies Packet 10-4 was distributed for review with plans for 1** Read on January 27, 2010 and
2nd Read/Final Adoption on February 24, 2010.
C. Voted: (5) To adopt the following Policies: Packet 10-2. (Poissonnier — Morang) (9 — 0)
1. BEDA — Notification of Board of Directors Meetings
2. BEDB — Agenda
3. BEDBA — Agenda Format
4. BEDC— Quorum
5. BEDD — Rules of Order
6. BEDF — Voting Method
7. BEDFA — Abstentions
8. BEDG — Minutes
9. BEDH — Public Participation at Board of Directors Meetings
10. BEDI — Board of Directors Relations with the Media
11. BEDJ — Broadcasting/Taping of Board of Directors Meetings by the Public
12. BG — Board of Directors Policy Process
13. BG-R — Policy Adoption Procedure
14. BHC — Board of Directors Communications with Staff
15. BIA — New Board of Directors Member Orientation
16. BIB — Board of Directors Member Development Opportunities
17. BIC — Board of Directors Member Freedom of Access Training
18. BIC-E — Certification of Completion of Freedom of Access Training
19. JHB - Truancy
D. 1st Read on the Following Policies: Packet 10-3
1. CA— Administrative Goals/Priorities Objectives
2. CB-—School Superintendent
3. CC — Administrative Organization
4. CCA — Organizational Chart
5. CHA — Development of Administrative Procedures
6. CHD -— Administration in the Absence of Policy
7. DA- Fiscal Management Goals/Priority Objectives
8. DB-— Annual Budget

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 11/18/09

Page 5 of 5
9. DBG- Budget Adoption Process
10. DFF — Student Activities Funds
11. DID — Inventories
12. DIE — Audits/Financial Monitoring
13. DJ — Bidding/Purchasing Requirements
14. DJC — Petty Cash Accounts
15. DLB — Tax Sheltered Annuities
16. DM — Cash in School Buildings
17. DN — School Properties Disposition
18. DO — Approval for New Programs

17. EXECUTIVE SESSION:

A. Voted: (6) To enter into Executive Session as outlined in 1 M.R.S.A § 405(6)(D) for the purpose
of discussing teacher and support staff negotiations for RSU No. 5. (Dube — Morang) (9 — 0)
Time In: 9:16 P.M. Time Out: 9:45 P.M.
18. ACTION AS A RESULT OF EXECUTIVE SESSION:
None
19. ADJOURNMENT:
Voted: (7) To adjourn at 9:46 P.M. (Poissonnier — Morang) (9 — 0)
Shannon L. Welsh, Ed.D.
Superintendent of Schools