# RSU 5 Board of Directors — Meeting Minutes
**Date:** August 25, 2010  
**Source:** [August 25, 2010](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/792bbcfb-d6fa-47df-842c-cc29effa705b)  
**PDF:** [2010-08-25.pdf](https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v1665588344/rsu5org/jnbjvlprmw2wozzw5ylm/2010-08-25.pdf)  
**Retrieved:** 2026-03-16  
**OCR processed:** 2026-03-16 10:11  

---

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting
Wednesday, August 25, 2010 — 6:30 P.M.
Freeport High School Library
Meeting Minutes
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action, either to
approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the September 22, 2010 meeting).
CALLED TO ORDER:
Chairperson Larkins called the meeting to order at 6:32 P.M.
MEMBERS PRESENT: _ Jane Blais, Kristen Dorsey (arrived at 6:42 p.m.), Eric Dube, John Green
(arrived at 6:50 p.m.), Brenda Kielty, Nelson Larkins, John Morang,
Peter Murray, Beth Parker
MEMBERS ABSENT: Cori Holt, Greg Wilson
3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:
4. CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:
A. VOTED: (1) To approve the Minutes of June 9, 2010 and August 11, 2010.
(Dube — Parker) (6 — 0 — 1 Murray)
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:
None
6. GOOD NEWS & RECOGNITION:
7. REPORTS FROM ADMINISTRATORS:

A. Tom Ambrose, Principal of Morse Street School reported he had a great summer with Morse
Street School family activities including a playground evening. Mr. Ambrose met with parents
and staff as he worked on his entry plan. A retreat day with staff was held on August 24",
Attended a three day literacy institute with staff this summer. The school is ready for students to
arrive on August 31%.

B. Beth Willhoite, Principal of Mast Landing School reported enrollment is at 254 with average
class sizes of 21. This year we have an increase in time for the literacy strategist, the librarian
and Ed Tech hours to work on enrichment. LCD projectors and tables were received from the old
Durham Elementary School. A team of teachers attended a literacy institute this summer.
Common planning time and the wellness fair will be worked on this year.

C. Lisa Demick, Principal of Pownal Elementary School reported she is having a great time and has
received much support from the community, staff and administrators. Ms. Demick send a survey
to parents and met with teachers to listen and learn. A retreat was held with teachers on positive
behavior. The school has a new roof, entry and lights in the gym. Enrollment is at 117 PreK-6.

D. Will Pidden, Principal of Durham Community School reported the ribbon cutting ceremony was
held for the new school with over 1,000 visitors. Tours of the school were given by 7” and 8"
grade students. The technology in the new school will be outstanding, but there is a slight delay

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 8/25/10

Page 2 of 5
in the classroom furniture. Enrollment for the school is at 409. All 7 and 8" graders will have
an opportunity to access the STEM Program that has also been expanded to the High School.

E. Ray Grogan, Principal of Freeport Middle School reported Ropes Course training is taking place
this week with 12-14 teachers taking the opportunity to be certified. Last year the middle school
had one interactive white board and this year we are up to eight. Worked on expeditionary and
interdisciplinary units over the summer. Will also be working on Literacy this year. Enrollment
is currently at 278. A Ripple Effect grant was received to target at-risk 7" and 8" grade students.
The middle school students will once again be accessing Virtual High School.

F. Bob Strong, Principal of Freeport High School reported outstanding teachers were hired over the
summer. Freshman orientation is scheduled for August 31* that includes a mentoring program
with upperclassman being matched up with a freshman student for the year. Nineteen students
will be transferring into the high school and an orientation program has been set up to help these
students adjust to a new school. Plato was used for summer school this year with much success.
Enrollment is currently at 497.

G. Dennis Ouellette, Director of Facilities and Transportation reported 1900 students have been
entered into the student routing system Trans Finder. Routes were developed fairly for each and
every student per Board policy. In 2009-2010 over 183,000 miles were traveled. We will save
approximately 1,400 miles this year with the new routing system. Two lease busses for Pownal
have been delivered with 7,000 and 17,000 miles.

8. Superintendent'S REPORT:

A. Celebration of First Days of School — Superintendent Welsh reported the Administrators met for

two days this summer and are a very effective team. A new teacher orientation was held and we have

hired a highly skilled effective group of teachers, very impressive. There was a lot of teacher
retraining that occurred over the summer. All teaching positions have been filled. A .6 time World

Language teacher has been hired for Freeport Middle School and Pownal Elementary School, this

will increase Pownal student's access to foreign language. All staff will be welcomed back on

August 30" with a breakfast at 7:30 a.m. and a short program in the FPAC beginning at 8:00 a.m.

Durham Community School's ribbon cutting ceremony was held yesterday.

B. Reporting of Student Social Security numbers — Superintendent Welsh reported the Legislature

passed a law allowing the Department of Education to use student social security numbers to track

data in their longitudinal data system. The district is required to notify parents of this action. A letter
is being sent home to parents indicating they do not have to provide the school with the social
security numbers, but if they do they need to provide written permission of such.

C. Work Plan for 2010-2011 — Superintendent Welsh reviewed the work plan for the upcoming year

including work on the Strategic Plan revision and goal setting, budget, negotiations for teachers and

support staff, a common election date for Board members and athletic and recreation facilities
planning.

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 8/25/10
Page 3 of 5
9. PUBLIC COMMENTS:

Durham: Denise LaFlamme mentioned a concern about home addresses listed on the bus routes.

Denise LaFlamme, Troy True, Bob Lussier, Will Pidden and Marc Frenette of Skelton, Taintor &

Abbott, representing the Durham Boosters, spoke about potential use of the modular classroom by

the Boosters and the Town of Durham, and storage of sports equipment items belonging to the

school/Boosters.
10. ORGANIZATIONAL BUSINESS:
A. Voted: (2) Action on sub-committee appointments.
1. Communications — Green
2. Safety — Wilson
3. IASA — Murray
4. Strategic Planning — Murray
(Murray — Blais) (9 — 0)
11. NEW BUSINESS:

A. VOTED: (3) To approve a Teacher Certification Plan for the RSU. (Dube — Morang) (9 — 0)

B. VOTED: (4) To amend the motion to appoint John Morang as the Board representative to the
committee and include an additional bullet to read as follows: Review athletic facility development
plans utilized by neighboring communities and school districts. (Larkins — Murray) (9 — 0)
VOTED: (5) To approve an Athletic and Recreation Facilities Advisory Committee Charge as amended.
(Morang — Dube) (9 — 0)

C. Action on the Durham modular classroom was tabled until the September 22, 2010 meeting.

D. VOTED: (6) To approve the revised Strategic Plan. (Dube — Morang) (9 — 0)

12. FINANCIAL REPORTS:
A. Final Budget 2010-2011
13. COMMUNICATIONS (Consent Agenda)
14. BOARD COMMENTS (Reports from Sub-Committees):

A. Communications — Chair Jane Blais reported the committee has meet a few times over the
summer and discussed ideas for increased communications during the upcoming school year.
Administrators and the district technology team have also met to discuss school and teacher
websites, training and updating of these sites. There will be a State of the Schools forum in
February.

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 8/25/10
Page 4 of 5
15. PERSONNEL:
A. Staff Summer Resignations:
1. Mari Baker — High School .5 Time Guidance Counselor
2. Kathryn Smith — School Psychological Services Provider
3. Stephanie Vigneault — Durham Community School Educational Technician
4. Richard Labbe — Morse Street School part time Custodian
5. Jocelyn French — FPAC Manager
6. Lorissa Lemay — Morse Street School Kindergarten Teacher
7. Beth Whitehead - .5 Time Physical Therapist
8. Carolyn Dupee — Teacher of Gifted and Talented
9. Rose Chesley — Durham part time Bus Driver
B. Staff Summer Retirements:
1. Betsy Sky-Mcllvain — Freeport Middle School Language Arts Teacher (effective at
the end of the 2010-2011 school year)
C. Staff Summer Hires:
1. Tom Acousti —- FPAC Manager
2. Beth Thompson — Pownal/Durham .8 Time Occupational Therapist
3. Susan Goddard — Mast Landing School .5 Time Literacy Strategist
4. Julia Colvin — Mast Landing School .2 Time Literacy Enrichment Teacher
5. Kelly Fitz-Randolph — Freeport Middle School 6" Grade Science Teacher
6. Seth Thompson — Technology Director
7. Tina Whalen — Durham Community School 4" Grade Teacher
8. Patti Bailey - Durham Community School Food Service Assistant
9. Helen Boulanger — Morse Street School Food Service Assistant
10. Jill Grogan — Morse Street School Kindergarten Teacher
11. John Nicholson — Freeport Middle School STEM Teacher
12. Dana Ryder — Freeport High School .5 Time Guidance Counselor
13. Peter Wolinsky — School Psychological Service Provider
14. Sara Johnson — Gifted and Talented Teacher
15. Kerri Rigazio — Freeport Middle/Pownal Elementary .6 Time Spanish Teacher
D. Staff Summer Voluntary Transfers:
1. Jonathan Amory — From FMS STEM Teacher to FHS Technology and Design
Teacher
16. POLICY REVIEW:
A. Policy Packet 10-7 was distributed for policy book update.
B. Voted: (7) To adopt the following policies: Packet 10-8 (Parker — Blais) (9 — 0)
1. CBI-— Evaluation of the Superintendent of Schools
2. KB -— Parent Involvement in Education
3. KDA — Public Information Program
4. KDB — Public's Right to Know/Freedom of Access

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 8/25/10
Page 5 of 5
5. KE-— Public concerns and Complaints
6. KF-—Community Use of School Facilities
7. KHB — Advertising in the Schools
8. KI — Visitors to the Schools
9. KLG — Relations with Law Enforcement Authorities
10. KLG-R — Relations with Law Enforcement Authorities Administrative Procedures
11. LDA — Student Teaching and Internships
17. EXECUTIVE SESSION:
A. VOTED (8): To enter into Executive Session as outlined in 1 M.R.S.A § 405(6)(D) for the
purpose of discussing teacher and support staff negotiations for RSU No. 5
(Parker — Murray) (9 — 0)
Time In: 8:35 P.M. Time Out: 9:30 P.M.
18. ACTION AS A RESULT OF EXECUTIVE SESSION:
A. VOTED (9): To ratify the Coastal Education Association for the Pownal Educational Support
Personnel Bargaining Agreement. (Morang - Parker) (9 - 0)
19. ADJOURNMENT:
Voted: (10) To adjourn at 9:32 P.M. (Morang — Dube) (9 — 0)
Shannon L. Welsh, Ed.D.
Superintendent of Schools