# RSU 5 Board of Directors — Meeting Minutes
**Date:** June 11, 2014  
**Source:** [June 11, 2014](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/89e58dbf-a12d-4d3a-9dc3-2130195ab056)  
**PDF:** [6_11_14min.pdf](https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v1657657608/rsu5org/sefsnecexeyvsvcz6tyd/6_11_14min.pdf)  
**Retrieved:** 2026-03-16  
**OCR processed:** 2026-03-16 10:01  

---

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting \ ,
Wednesday, June 11, 2014 — 6:30 p.m.
Freeport High School - Cafeteria
Meeting Minutes
6:00 — 6:30 p.m. A Meet and Greet the New Interim Superintendents was held
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action, either to
approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the September 24, 2014 meeting).
CALLED TO ORDER:
Chairperson Larkins called the meeting to order at 6:34 p.m.
MEMBERS PRESENT: Kathryn Brown, Candace Decsipkes, Nelson Larkins, Naomi Ledbetter, John
Morang, Peter Murray, Beth Parker, Brian Pike, Michelle Ritcheson, Valeria
Steverlynck, Karin VanNostrand
MEMBERS ABSENT:
3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:
4. CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:
A. VOTED: (1) To approve the minutes of May 14, 2014, May 15, 2014 and May 28, 2014 as
presented barring any errors or omissions. (Parker — Murray) (11 — 0)
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:
6. GOOD NEWS & RECOGNITION:

A. Recognition of Retirees — Retiring staff members were recognized for their many years of
service to the students and communities of RSUS.

B. Journey Into Writing: Governor's Young Writer of the Year Awards — Rich Robinson reported
Freeport High School has won eleven times since it started in 2005 and has won top prize four
times. This year Evan Tims was one of the top twenty finalists and Erik Ly is one of the top
three writers in the State of Maine.

7. REPORTS FROM ADMINISTRATORS:
8. Superintendent'S REPORT:

A. Budget FY15 — Superintendent Welsh reported the school budget for 2014-2015 has passed by a
vote of 1,264 in favor and 908 against. Additional money was added to the budget at the Annual
Budget Meeting for substitutes. The Board will review the policy in September. Superintendent
Welsh thanked the voters for their support. :

B. Professional Growth & Evaluation Update — Jessica Sturges provided an update on the work of
the committee during the 2013-2014 school year including: development of a professional
growth rubric; e-Portfolio; and rotation and length of evaluation process. Work for 2014-2015
includes: developing and piloting student growth and feedback components; finalize summative
effectiveness rating scale; further investigate role of peer support person; and review and make
recommendations to administrator evaluation.

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 6/11/14
Page 2 of 5
9. PUBLIC COMMENTS:
Jonas Werner from Freeport noted his frustration with the progress of the Freeport withdrawal
process.
Charly Haversat from Freeport asked about minutes of withdrawal meetings and stated the process
needs to speed up.
Kevin Nadeau from Durham spoke about the survey the Durham Advisory Committee conducted
and the results.
Lindsay Sterling from Freeport asked questions about the withdrawal process and competition of
private schools for our students.
John Egan from Freeport commended the Governor's Young Writers recognized earlier and thanked
Dr. Welsh for her years of service. Mr. Egan asked about how the new RSU would pay for FHS
improvements.
Mandy McPherson from Freeport asked for clarification on who the Working Group is representing
10. ORGANIZATIONAL BUSINESS (to take effect July 1, 2014)
A. VOTED: (2) To appoint Nelson Larkins as Chairperson for RSU No. 5 Board of Directors.
(Parker — Decsipkes) (11 — 0)
B. VOTED: (3) To appoint Kate Brown as Vice-Chairperson for RSU No. 5 Board of Directors.
(Naomi — Decsipkes) (11 — 0)
C. VOTED: (4) To add, delete, or consolidate committees and make annual appointments.
1. Negotiations (Professional) — Larkins, Murray, Parker
Negotiations (Support) — Decsipkes, Pike
2. Policy — Decsipkes, Ledbetter, VanNostrand
3. Strategic Communications Committee - Brown, Decsipkes, Steverlynck
4. Finance - Brown, Morang, Ritcheson
5. RSUS5 Student Aspirations - Ritcheson
6. RSUS Adult, Recreation and Community Education Advisory Committee - Parker
7. Maine Region 10 Technical High School — Morang, VanNostrand
8. Dropout Prevention Committee —Ledbetter
9. Stipend Review Committee — Larkins, Pike
10. Cable TV Board & Technology Committee - Murray
11. Freeport Performing Arts Center Advisory Committee - Parker
12. Facilities Committee — Morang, VanNostrand
13. MSMA Legislative Contact - Ledbetter
14. Safety Committee — Pike, VanNostrand
15. Wellness Committee - Steverlynck
16. IASA Including: Chapter II & NCLB/Drug Free Schools Title IV — Ritcheson
17. School Attorney - Drummond Woodsum
18. School Physician — Julia Lockwood
(Ritcheson — Parker) (11 — 0)

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 6/11/14
Page 3 of 5
11. UNFINISHED BUSINESS:
A. VOTED: (5) That the Computation and Declaration of Votes relating to the Budget Validation
Referendum dated and attached hereto be and is hereby approved. (Murray — Parker) (11 — 0)
B. VOTED: (6) That the Computation and Declaration of Votes relating to the Budget Validation
Referendum be entered upon the records of Regional School Unit No. 5 (the “Regional School
Unit”). (Pike — Ritcheson) (11 — 0)
C. VOTED: (7) That a Certified copy of the Computation and Declaration of Votes relating to the
Budget Validation Referendum be sent to each of the Municipal Clerks within the Regional
School Unit. (Ritcheson — Pike) (11 — 0)
D. VOTED: (8) That the Assessment Warrant and the Assessment Schedule and Notice of
Installments prepared by the Treasurer for each member municipality of this Regional School
Unit for fiscal year 2013-2014 be approved and be issued in form presented to this meeting;
and that the Treasurer be authorized and directed to deliver to each member municipality its
Assessment Warrant and its Assessment Schedule and Notice of Installments.
(Morang — Ledbetter) (11 — 0)
12. NEW BUSINESS:
A. VOTED: (9) To adopt the revised Strategic Framework (Parker — Kate) (11 — 0)
B. VOTED: (10) To adopt the revised RSUS Professional Growth and Evaluation System.
(Parker — Steverlynck) (11-0)
C. VOTED: (11) To authorize the Superintendent to hire professional staff for the remainder of
June, 2014. (Steverlynck - Parker) (11 — 0)
D. VOTED: (12) To authorize the Interim Superintendent to hire professional staff during the
summer months. (Murray - Parker) (11 — 0)
13. FINANCIAL REPORTS:
A. RSU No. 5 Financial Statement June 5, 2014
14. COMMUNICATIONS (Consent Agenda):
A. 2014-2015 Board of Directors Meeting Schedule
B. 2nd Read/Adoption of the Comprehensive Education Plan
15. BOARD COMMENTS (Reports from Sub-Committees):
A. Strategic Communications — Candice Decsipkes reported the committee met on May 28, 2014
and discussed the following items: revisions to the Strategic Plan; cross-curricular standards
pilot; writing assessment; and improving communication with the communities.

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 6/11/14
Page 4 of 5

B, Withdrawal Working Group — Michelle Ritcheson reported the committee met on June 2"! and
reported out on the meeting with the Commissioner, the Chair of the Withdrawal Committee
and the two attorneys. The committee also prepared for the joint meeting with the Freeport
Withdrawal Committee. The committee also met on June 4" to prepare for mediation with the
Withdrawal Committee.

C. Finance Committee — Kate Brown reported the committee met on May 14" to review the
revised budget impact sheet. The draft warrant and meeting schedule for 2014-2015 was also
reviewed. Warrants were signed.

16. PERSONNEL:

A. Staff Hires:

1. VOTED: (13) To employ Patti Francis as a .5 Time Librarian at Pownal Elementary School for
the 2014-2015 school year. (Pike — Brown) (11 — 0)

2. VOTED: (14) To employ Lynett Larkin-Silva as a .16 Time Nurse at Mast Landing School for
the 2014-2015 school year (one year position). (Steverlynck — Murray) (11 — 0)

3. VOTED: (15) To employ Tate Gale as a District-wide K-6 Math Strategist for the 2014-2015
school year. (Brown — Murray) (11 — 0)

4. VOTED: (16) To employ Simon Skold as a .5 Time Drama Teacher for the 2014-2015 school

year. (Steverlynck — Parker) (11 — 0)
5. VOTED: (17) To employ Margaret Chalmers as a .5 Time English Teacher for the 2014-2015
school year. (Pike — Steverlynck) (11 — 0)
B. Staff Resignations:
1. Melanie Moll — Morse Street School Classroom Teacher
2. Kierston Donovan — Freeport High School STEM Teacher
3. Cassandra Riegler-Fread —- Durham Community School Educational Technician
4. David Cole — Freeport High School Bus Driver/Custodian
17. POLICY REVIEW:
A. VOTED: (19) To adopt the Following Policies: Packet 14-7 (Parker — Brown) (11 — 0)
1. IKE — Promotion, Retention, and Acceleration of Students
2. IKF— Graduation Requirements
3. JJIA — Private School Students — Access to Public School Co-Curricular, Interscholastic
and Extra-Curricular Activities
4. JJIAA-E]1 — Private School Student Application for Participation in RSU5 Co-Curricular
Activities
5. JJJAA-E2 — Private School Student Application for Participation in RSUS Extra-
Curricular Activities

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting Minutes 6/11/14
Page 5 of 5
6. JJIAA-E3 — Verification of Private School Student Eligibility for Participation in RSU5
Co-Curricular Activities
7. JIIAA-E4 — Verification of Private School Student Eligibility for Participation in RSUS
Extra-Curricular Activities
18. EXECUTIVE SESSION:
19. ACTION AS A RESULT OF EXECUTIVE SESSION:
20. ADJOURNMENT:
VOTED: (20) To adjourn at 8:30 p.m. (Ledbetter — Pike) (11 — 0).
Shannon L. Welsh, Ed.D.
Superintendent of Schools