# RSU 5 Board of Directors — Meeting Minutes
**Date:** April 12, 2023  
**Source:** [April 12, 2023&nbsp;](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/bce233ff-774f-4f73-b0ea-97844d321717)  
**PDF:** [4-12-23Minutes.pdf](https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v1681825440/rsu5org/hbey7zmbveszpzesewdb/4-12-23Minutes.pdf)  
**Retrieved:** 2026-03-12  
**OCR processed:** 2026-03-12 15:16  

---

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting
Wednesday, April 12, 2023 — 6:30 p.m.
Pownal Elementary School - Cafeteria
Meeting Minutes
6:00 - 6:30 p.m. Q&A on the FY24 Budget
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action,
either to approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the April 26, 2023 meeting).
1. CALLED TO ORDER:
Vice Chair Elisabeth Munsen called the meeting to order at 6:30 p.m.

2. MEMBERS PRESENT: Colin Cheney, Candace deCsipkes, Danielle George, Kara Kaikini,
Elisabeth Munsen, Maura Pillsbury (arrived at 6:31 p.m.), Paul Schulz, Kelly Sink, Madelyn
Vertenten. Student Representative Piper Williams was in attendance
MEMBERS ABSENT: Susana Hancock, Michelle Ritcheson

3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:

4. CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:

VOTED: To approve the Minutes of March 15, 2023 and March 22, 2023.

(Vertenten — Cheney) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:

Item #8.A. Additional resignations

Items #14 D-G

6. GOOD NEWS AND RECOGNITION:

A. Report from Board's Student Representative — Piper Williams
B. Good News from Pownal Elementary School - Holly Johnson
7. PUBLIC COMMENT:
None
8. REPORTS FROM Superintendent:
A. Items for Information
1. Resignations: (effective at the end of the school year)
Stephanie Lewia - School Psychologist
Garland Thayer - DCS 5th Grade Teacher
Diane Kew - FHS English Teacher
Haley Poston - FHS Math Teacher
James Flynn - FHS Science Teacher
Alondra Reynolds - MSS Kindergarten Teacher
B. Additional State Subsidy
9. ADMINISTRATOR REPORTS:
None

RSU No. 5 Minutes for April 12, 2023
Page 2
10. BOARD COMMENTS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS:
A. Strategic Communications
1. Workplace Satisfaction Survey
2. Migration of Students
B. Elisabeth Munsen reminded Board members about openings on the following
Administrator Interview Committees: Director of Transportation, Director of Facilities
and Director of Technology.
C. Board members voiced their appreciation for the Board learning opportunities at the
schools.
11. POLICY REVIEW:
None
12. UNFINISHED BUSINESS:
A. VOTED: That the Vote entitled, “Vote to Call and Approve the Warrants for the Budget
Meeting and the Budget Validation Referendum and to Authorize the Notice of Amounts
Adopted,” be approved in form presented to this meeting and that a copy of said Vote be
included with the minutes of this meeting. (Pillsbury — Vertenten) (9 — 0) The Student
Representative voted with the majority.
13. NEW BUSINESS:
None
14. PERSONNEL:
A. VOTED: To employ Kelly Wentworth as Director of Finance and Human Resources for
the 2023-2024 school year.
(Vertenten — Sink) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
B. VOTED: To employ Abigail Hunt as a 1* Grade Teacher at Morse Street School for the
2023-2024 school year.
(Sink — Pillsbury) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
C. VOTED: To employ Page Brown as a 7/8 Grade Humanities Teacher at Durham
Community School for the 2023-2024 school year.
(Pillsbury — Vertenten) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
D. VOTED: To employ Claire Bowen as a Kindergarten Teacher at Morse Street School for
the 2023-2024 school year.
(Vertenten — Pillsbury) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
E. VOTED: To employFrank Burns as a 7/8 Grade Math Teacher at Durham Community
School and Freeport Middle School for the 2023-2024 school year (one year only).
(Vertenten — Pillsbury) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
F, VOTED: To employ Sean Moore as a STEM Teacher at Durham Community School for
the 2023-2024 school year.
(Vertenten — Pillsbury) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
G. VOTED: To employ Alicia Ricker as a 7/8 Grade Math Teacher at Durham Community
School for the 2023-2024 school year.
(Vertenten — Pillsbury) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
15. PUBLIC COMMENT:
None

RSU No. 5 Minutes for April 12, 2023
Page 3
16. ADJOURNMENT:
VOTED: To adjourn at 7:14 p.m. (Sink — Vertenten) (9 — 0) The Student Representative
voted with the majority.
J g M. Skorapa, Sei of Schools