# RSU 5 Board of Directors — Meeting Minutes
**Date:** March 13, 2024  
**Source:** [March 13, 2024&nbsp;](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/023d0d8a-c27a-474a-b109-56105f7a7bf4)  
**PDF:** [3-13-24Minutes.pdf](https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v1710424979/rsu5org/mmxcfz6dsk9i5h6eitng/3-13-24Minutes.pdf)  
**Retrieved:** 2026-03-12  
**OCR processed:** 2026-03-12 15:14  

---

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting
Wednesday, March 13, 2024 — 6:30 p.m.
Freeport High School - Library
Meeting Minutes
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action,
either to approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the March 20, 2024 meeting).
1. CALLED TO ORDER:
Chair Michelle Ritcheson called the meeting to order at 6:32 p.m.

2. MEMBERS PRESENT: Colin Cheney, Candace deCsipkes, Malik Farlow, Cheyenne Farrell,
Danielle George, Kara Kaikini, Elisabeth Munsen, Maura Pillsbury, Michelle Ritcheson, Kelly
Sink and Phoebe Williamson Student Representative (left at 6:45 p.m.)

MEMBERS ABSENT: Carolyn Jensen
3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:
4. CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:
A. VOTED: To approve the Minutes of February 28, 2024.
(George ~ Munsen) (10 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:
None

6. GOOD NEWS AND RECOGNITION:

A. Report from Board's Student Representative - Phoebe Williamson

7. PUBLIC COMMENT:

None
8. REPORTS FROM Superintendent:
A. Region 10 Technical High School Budget Update - Shawn Chabot
B. Review of FY25 Superintendent's Proposed Budget
9. ADMINISTRATOR REPORTS:
None
10. BOARD COMMENTS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS:
None
11. POLICY REVIEW:
None

12. UNFINISHED BUSINESS:

A. Board Deliberations on the FY25 Superintendent's Proposed Budget

RSU No. 5 Minutes for March 13, 2024
Page 2
13. NEW BUSINESS:
A. VOTED: To approve an adjustment to the 2023-2024 school calendar by changing
Monday, April 8, 2024 to an early release day for students and Wednesday, May 8, 2024
to a full student day. (Munsen — deCsipkes) (10-0)
14. PERSONNEL:
None
15. PUBLIC COMMENT:
None
16. ADJOURNMENT:
VOTED: To adjourn at 9:44 p.m. (Pillsbury — Farlow) (10-0)
Jedn M. Skorapa, Superintendent of Schools