# RSU 5 Board of Directors — Meeting Minutes
**Date:** March 12, 2025  
**Source:** [March 12, 2025&nbsp;](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/675f7ab0-6310-44fc-a027-73434a7eedc7)  
**PDF:** [3-12-25Minutes.pdf](https://resources.finalsite.net/images/v1741880036/rsu5org/vw2etngmkgj2daykuzck/3-12-25Minutes.pdf)  
**Retrieved:** 2026-03-12  
**OCR processed:** 2026-03-12 15:13  

---

RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting
Wednesday, March 12, 2025 — 6:30 p.m.
Freeport High School - Library
Meeting Minutes
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action,
either to approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the March 19, 2025 meeting).
1. CALLED TO ORDER:
Chair Michelle Ritcheson called the meeting to order at 6:30 p.m.

2. MEMBERS PRESENT: Colin Cheney, Anna Child, Candace deCsipkes (left at 7:15 p.m.) ,
Cheyenne Farrell, Danielle George, Kara Kaikini, Elisabeth Munsen, Maura Pillsbury, Michelle
Ritcheson, Kelly Sink and Phoebe Williamson, Student Representative
MEMBERS ABSENT: Malik Farlow

3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:

4. CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:

A. VOTED: To approve the Minutes of February 26, 2025. (Sink — Farrell) (10 — 0) The Student
Representative voted with the majority.
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:
None
6. GOOD NEWS AND RECOGNITION:
A. Report from Board's Student Representative - Phoebe Williamson
7. PUBLIC COMMENT:
Daniel Freund, Freeport; Charlie Henshaw, Freeport; Valerie Williams, Freeport
8. REPORTS FROM Superintendent:
A. Resignations: Lindsey Lopes - FHS Office Secretary
9. ADMINISTRATOR REPORTS:
None
10. BOARD COMMENTS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS:
A. Board Information Exchange and Agenda Requests - Maura Pillsbury reported she testified,
as an individual citizen, on the bill to protect students from doxxing.
- Curriculum and Program Development Committee
B. Finance Committee
C. Facilities and Operations Committee
D. Policy Committee

RSU No. 5 Minutes for March 12, 2025
Page 2
11. POLICY REVIEW:
A. VOTED: To approve 2” Read of the following policies. (Munsen — Pillsbury) (10 — 0) The
Student Representative voted with the majority.
1. EEA - Student Transportation Services
2. EEAEA - Student Transportation Employee Requirements, Training and Responsibilities
3. GCOA - Supervision and Evaluation of Professional Staff
12. UNFINISHED BUSINESS:
A. Review of FY26 Superintendent's Proposed Budget
B. Board Deliberations on the FY26 Superintendent's Proposed Budget
13. NEW BUSINESS:
None
14. PERSONNEL:
A. VOTED: To employ Jeremy Arsenault as Director of Transportation.
(Munsen — Farrell) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.
15. PUBLIC COMMENT:
None
16. ADJOURNMENT:
VOTED: To adjourn at 9:25 p.m. (Pillsbury — Kaikini) (9 — 0) The Student Representative voted
with the majority.
Jedn M. Skorapa, Superintendent of Schools