# FC-2024-11-20-agenda

**Source:** [FC-2024-11-20-agenda](https://www.rsu5.org/fs/resource-manager/view/d144478d-b284-42e5-8721-788d552b7a8a)  
**Extraction method:** OCR (Tesseract)  
**Processed:** 2026-03-16 20:40  

---

REGULAR MEETING OF RSU NO. 5 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
WEDNESDAY- NOVEMBER 20, 2024
DURHAM COMMUNITY SCHOOL - CAFETERIA
6:30 P.M. REGULAR SESSION
AGENDA
1. Call to Order:
The meeting was called to order at p.m. by Chair Michelle Ritcheson
2. Attendance:
___Colin Cheney ___ Kara Kaikini
___ Candace deCsipkes ___ Elisabeth Munsen
___ Malik Farlow ___ Maura Pillsbury
___ Cheyenne Farrell ___ Michelle Ritcheson
___ Danielle George ___Kelly Sink
___ Freeport Vacant ___ Moon Tussing, Student Representative
___ Phoebe Williamson, Student Representative
3. Pledge of Allegiance:
4. Consideration of Minutes:
A. Consideration and approval of the Minutes of November 6, 2024 as presented barring any
errors or omissions.
Motion: 2™: Vote:
5. Adjustments to the Agenda:
6. Good News & Recognition:
A. Report from Board’s Student Representative (10 Minutes)
7. Public Comments: (10 Minutes)
8. Reports from Superintendent: (10 Minutes)
A. Superintendent’s Report
B. Resignations: Sally Sellers - FHS Ed Tech
C. Support Staff New Hires: Conor Fox - FMS Ed Tech
9. Administrator Reports:
A. Finance - Kelly Wentworth (5 Minutes)
B. Update from Athletics Department and Goal Review - Eric Hall (20 Minutes)
C. Update from Durham Community School and Goal Review - Will Pidden (20 Minutes)
10. Board Comments and Committee Reports:
A. Board Information Exchange and Agenda Requests (10 Minutes)
e Region Ten Cooperative Board
e Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Committee
B. Facilities and Operations Committee (5 Minutes)
C. Policy Committee (5 Minutes)

RSU No. 5 Agenda for November 20, 2024
Page 2
11. Policy Review: (20 Minutes)
A. Consideration and approval of 2 Read of the following policies:
1. ACAA - Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students
2. ACAA-R - Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure (Revise
into two new procedures ACAA-R1 and ACAA-R2)
3. JIE - Pregnant Students (New)
Motion: 2"; Vote:
B. Consideration and approval of 1* Read of the following policies:
1. AC- Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
2. ACAB- Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Employees
3. ACAB- R Employee Discrimination/Harassment and title IX Sexual Harassment
Complaint Procedures (Revised into two new procedures ACAB-R1 and ACAB-R2)
Motion: 2m, Vote:
12. Unfinished Business:
None
13. New Business:
None
14. Personnel:
None
15. Public Comments: (10 Minutes)
16. Adjournment:
Motion: _ 2nd : Vote: Time:

Then yA
RSU No. 5 Board of Directors Meeting
Wednesday, November 6, 2024 — 6:30 p.m.
Freeport High School - Library
Meeting Minutes
(NOTE: These Minutes are not official until approved by the Board of Directors. Such action,
either to approve or amend and approve, is anticipated at the November 20, 2024 meeting).
1. CALLED TO ORDER:
Chair Michelle Ritcheson called the meeting to order at 6:30 p.m.

2. MEMBERS PRESENT: Colin Cheney, Candace deCsipkes, Malik Farlow, Cheyenne Farrell,
Danielle George, Kara Kaikini, Elisabeth Munsen, Maura Pillsbury, Michelle Ritcheson, Kelly
Sink and Phoebe Williamson Student Representative
MEMBERS ABSENT: There is a vacant Freeport seat

3. PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE:

4, CONSIDERATION OF MINUTES:

A. VOTED: To approve the Minutes of October 23, 2024.
(Farlow — Munsen) (10 — 0) The Student Representative voted with the majority.

5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE AGENDA:

Item 13 - Discussion about Board Committees
6. GOOD NEWS AND RECOGNITION:
A. Report from Board's Student Representative - Phoebe Williamson
7, PUBLIC COMMENT:
None
8. REPORTS FROM SUPERINTENDENT:
1. Resignations: Kasee Solis, DCS Ed Tech
2. Support Staff New Hires: Kossi Kouwonou - FHS Custodian
Patrick Conley - FMS Ed Tech III
9. ADMINISTRATOR REPORTS:
A. Update from Transportation Department and Goal Review - Jeremy Arsenault
B. Update from Nutrition Department and Goal Review - Erica Mullally
C. Update from Mast Landing School and Goal Review - Emily Grimm
10. BOARD COMMENTS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS:
None
11. POLICY REVIEW:
None
12. UNFINISHED BUSINESS:
None

RSU No. 5 Minutes for November 6, 2024
Page 2
13. NEW BUSINESS:
A. VOTED: To appoint Board members to committees (Pillsbury — deCsipkes) (10 — 0)
Kelly Sink - Finance Committee
Cheyenne Farrell - Support Staff Negotiations
Kara Kaikini - Freeport Cable TV
Colin Cheney - Curriculum and Program Development
14. PERSONNEL:
None
15. PUBLIC COMMENT:
None
16. ADJOURNMENT:
VOTED: To adjourn at 7:28 p.m. (Sink — Munsen) (10 — 0)
cap A. Skorapa, Superintendent fi Koidols

Then tS, A
RSU No. 5 iy
Warrant Articles For the Period 10/01/2024 through 10/31/2024
Fiscal Year: 2024-2025 C0 Include Pre Encumbrance
nee ———————————_—_—_—_—_——_—$PRPPC——LR
Budget Range To Date Year To Date Balance Encumbrance Budget Balance
INCOME
GENERAL FUND REVENUES
REQUIRED LOCAL FUNDS (-) $19,573,905.68 $1,458,229.70 $6,065,464.71 $13,508,440.97 $0.00 $13,508,440.97 69.0%
ADDITIONAL LOCAL FUNDS (-) $13,087 ,078.17 $954,448.63 $3,984,674.13 $9, 102,404.04 $0.00 $9,102,404.04 69.6%
ADDLN SHARED REVENUE (-) $139,883.76 $0.00 $0.00 $139,883.76 $0.00 $139,883.76 100.0%
INTEREST REVENUE (-) $209,000.00 $0.00 $122,391.81 $86,608.19 $0.00 $86,608.19 41.4% |
STATE REVENUES (-) $7,571,992.39 $552,709.13 $2,172,020.70 $5,399,971.69 $0.00 $5,399,971.69 71.3%
MISC REVENUES (-) $18,600.00 $36.00 $36.00 $18,564.00 $0.00 $18,564.00 99.8%
FUND BALANCE (-) $900,000.00 $0.00 $0.00 $900,000.00 $0.00 $900,000.00 100.0%
Sub-total : GENERAL FUND REVENUES = ($41,500,460.00) ($2,965,423.46) ($12,344,587.35) ($29,155,872.65) $0.00 ($29,155,872.65) 70.3%
Total : INCOME ($41,500,460.00) ($2,965,423.46) ($12,344,587.35) ($29,155,872.65) $0.00 ($29,155,872.65) 70.3%
EXPENSES
GENERAL FUND EXPENSES
ARTICLE 1 REGULAR $18,384 ,052.00 $2,081,778.65 $3,649,860.53 $14,734,191.47 $12,047,140.00 $2,687,051.47 14.6%
INSTRUCTION (+)
ARTICLE 2 SPECIAL EDUCATION $5,870,507 .00 $671,653.13 $1,159,009.36 $4,711,497.64 $3,887 ,026.78 $824,470.86 14.0%
(+)
ARTICLE 3 - CAREER & $289,668.00 $24,139.00 $120,695.00 $168,973.00 $168,973.00 $0.00 0.0%
TECHNICAL CTR (+)
ARTICLE 4 - OTHER INSTRUCTION $1,034,849.00 $126,248.41 $194,443.11 $840,405.89 $410,666.38 $429,739.51 41.5%
(+)
ARTICLE 5 - STUDENT & STAFF $4,371,246.00 $419,568.29 $1,280,698.80 $3,090,547.20 $2,430,585.34 $659,961.86 15.1%
SUPPORT (+)
ARTICLE 6 - SYSTEM $1,179,440.00 $115,321.69 $429,155.74 $750,284.26 $519,856.70 $230,427.56 19.5%
ADMINISTRATION (+)
ARTICLE 7 - SCHOOL $2,348,210.00 $266,648.59 $722,799.15 $1,625,410.85 $1,417 ,491.39 $207,919.46 8.9%
ADMINISTRATION (+)
ARTICLE 8 - TRANSPORTATION & $1,586,682.00 $238,466.68 $459,435.77 $1, 127,246.23 $756,915.26 $370,330.97 23.3%
BUSES (+)
ARTICLE 9 - FACILITIES $5,139,408.00 $555,795.91 $2,308,518.66 $2,830,889.34 $1,328,311.73 $1,502,577.61 29.2%
MAINTENANCE (+)
ARTICLE 10 - DEBT SERVICE & $1,111,064.00 $108,835.00 $108,835.00 $1,002,229.00 $1,002 ,228.52 $0.48 0.0%
OTHER COMMITMENTS (+)
ARTICLE 11 - ALL OTHER $185,334.00 $0.00 $185,334.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 0.0%
EXPENDITURES (+)
Operating Statement with Encumbrance
Printed: 11/12/2024 6:46:36 AM Report: rptGLOperatingStatementwithEnc 2024.1.27 Page: 1

RSU No. 5
Warrant Articles For the Period 10/01/2024 through 10/31/2024
Fiscal Year: 2024-2025 C1 Include Pre Encumbrance
Budget Range To Date Year To Date Balance Encumbrance Budget Balance
Sub-total : GENERAL FUND EXPENSES $41,500,460.00 $4,608,455.35 $10,618,785.12  $30,881,674.88 $23,969,195.10 $6,912,479.78 16.7%
Total : EXPENSES $41,500,460.00 $4,608,455.35  $10,618,785.12  $30,881,674.88 $23,969,195.10 $6,912,479.78 16.7%
NET ADDITION DEFICIT) $0.00 $1,643,031.89 ($1,725,802.23) $1,725,802.23 $23,969,195.10 ($22,243,392.87) 0.0%
End of Report
Operating Statement with Encumbrance
Printed: 11/12/2024 6:46:36 AM Report: rptGLOperatingStatementwithEnc 2024.1.27 Page: 2

———
Tren 49.B.
Athletics Department_Goals 2023-2024
Goal Worksheet
School: Athletics Department |
School Goal Strategies and Action Steps Timeline Evidence of Effectiveness
Responsibility
District Strategic Goal: All FHS Strategic Plan: Theory of Action:
RSU 5 students experience | IF The Athletic Department of RSU #5 provides co-curricular Measurements of each of
a joyful learning climate opportunities/interscholastic sports for student-athletes in the 2023-2024 FHS
that is safe, nurturing, and | grades 6-12 to participate in ... THEN these programs Strategic Plan Action Steps
fosters curiosity. should provide equitable access to what is essential to
compete and participate
Athletic Department Evidence to assess
2023-24 Goal #1: To review, | Selection of action steps for 2023-24: progress:
assess and examine our
athletic/co-curricular 1) Review participation, are we meeting the needs of
programs through a lens those students participating in co/curricular Survey of the students of | Survey Results May 2024
equity for all of our programs and interscholastic sports. the status of our current | No Survey -
programs and participants . . d . through the co-curricular and conducted
here at FHS through access Examining an assessing programs 6 interscholastic sports are
_ . lens of equitable

of facilities and equipment .
used and purchased by RSU -Does each sport have the same essential needs
#5 met

-To ensure that we are meeting Title IX standards

-To review our programs, are we meeting the

needs, do we offer enough

-Does our expenditure for essential equipment

needs equitable for all sports, and genders

1

2) Reviewing the use of the facilities by our athletics Reviewing our practice Review budget, for
team in an equitable fashion schedule over the last 2023-24, detail budget for
-Does every Fall and Spring Team have equitable three years, meeting with | 2024-25-looked to balance
use of the Turf Facility? coaches of the Fall and in areas to ensure the
-Is the practice time equitable, are teams feeling Spring. ROTELCORGAITS Wists eee
. . . on each gender
that they have enough time without being bumped
off
Ongoing throughout the
2023-24 School year
This fall set the practice
schedule to ensure more
time on the turf for JV and
Varsity practices, still a
work in progress with our
First team soccer program
District Goal : All RSU 5 Uniforms are an essential need for all of our athletic teams | Create a rotation chart of | September 2023-rebuilt
students regularly engage at DCS, FMS, and FHS. In the past having a rotation will all sports for DCS, FMS, the rotation, met with new
in meaningful student allow for accurate financial planning, and preparing for and FHS, with vendor, Uniform vendor Sept 24,
centered learning. potential uniform changes made by the National! brand/company, year purchased new FT/JV
Federation of High School Athletics. purchased soccer uniforms,
Athletic Department Sept 24, met with BSN
2023-24 Goal #2: Looking 1) To build a uniforms rotation for DCS, FMS, FHS, that A uniforms dealer about
at the athletic department will illustrate year bought, company, brand, and switching over
through the lens of team’s next rotation
equitable, will also help to 2) Are we equitable in purchasing uniforms Assess all uniform Ongoing, each season,
create a uniform rotation -are uniform purchased with same quality, and ordering with FMS, and each sport
that has been outdated and same company/brand DCS Assistant AD’s along Working with the Vendor
will align that all teams with myself each season. | to ensure quality uniforms
receive the same proper 3) To balance the purchasing by ordering both home
attention and are aware of and away in the same given year
where they are in the - A more effective and efficient way of using local
uniform rotation so Monies to purchase the uniforms by ordering home
planning can be made out a and away in the same rotation
year prior to ordering -When ordering both home and away, this will
uniforms for DCS, FMS, and allow for one rotation as opposed to sporadic when
FHS teams will get the home or away uniform.
2

District Goal : All RSU5 Developing a Student-athlete leadership to help develop HS AD takes LTC through Fall 2023-to three class
students regularly engage leadership skills for our student-athletes who are the National through the NIAAA LTC
in meaningful student designated as captains. Interscholastic Athletic Course
centered learning. 1) Being a captain for a sports team is usually Administrator Association | LTC 510 Legal Issues IV
reserved for a senior, which is appropriate but a lot LTC 638 Creating an
Athletic Department of those put in a position of leadership are new to Awareness of Diverse
2023-24 Goal #3: To it. Groups w/Athletic
develop a Student-Athlete 2) Creating a Captain’s Leadership Council is to Western Maine Programs
Leadership Council to help develop those skills, working with captains on and | Conference Leadership LTC 726 Student Leadership
develop leadership on the off the fields, addressing concerns that are sport Summit Development
field and off the field for related and school related
our athletics program at 3) To take skills learned in the classroom and apply
FHS. them onto the sports field
The Leadership Captain’s Council will be another avenue to | Leadership Class Through | November 2023-took 6
continue to develop our students as they continue their the National Federation of | student-athletes to this
journey after they leave Freeport High School High School Athletics training, where they
worked amongst the
student-athletes in our
Curriculum Developed Conference, will be going
through classes, and again in Nov 24, and using
discussion amongst as a part of captaincy
coaches
tmplementation of Spring 2024
Student-Athlete Touch based with other
Leadership Council schools
3

Athletics Department Goals 2024-2025
School: Athletics Department
Schoo} Goal Strategies and Action Steps Timeline Evidence of Effectiveness
Responsibility
District Strategic Goal: All FHS Strategic Plan: Theory of Action:
RSU 5 students experience | IF The Athletic Department of RSU #5 provides co-curricular
a joyful learning climate opportunities/interscholastic sports for student-athletes in
that is safe, nurturing, and | grades 6-12 to participate in ... THEN these programs
fosters curiosity. should provide equitable access to what is essential to
compete and participate
Athletic Department
2024-24 Goal #1:To Selection of action steps for 2024-25:
continue looking at how -During Pre-Season Coaches meeting, discuss RSU 5 Each Pre-season coaches | Flow Chart that shows the
coaches coach, and how Policies, such as reporting of issues/concerns brought toa | meeting steps, and what they will
coaches communicate to coach and what are their legal obligations, and how they August, November, March | need to do if there is a
student-athletes. Are we should proceed. What are their steps? What is their And throughout the situation where the safety
communicating with direction? There needs to be a clear understanding from season through contact. of the student-athlete is
purpose, appropriateness, compromised by an adult
talking in the same myself. or another member of the
language team. Created by Spring
-Supervision of areas, locker rooms, team activities, 2025
pre-practice, team bus. Are we closely monitoring them, if
not, what can we do to have a coach present? Need to Coaches clinic, NFHS
have an assistant delegated to being there until the head training
coach can arrive. Have practices that will allow coaches to
arrive
4

District Goal : All RSU 5 -Since August of 2023 we have a Full Time Athletic Trainer Starting in Fall of Each year to put together
students regularly engage who has brought some resources to help track our injuries, | 2023-through now data of injuries from each
in meaningful student called Healthy Roster, Sway. Over the last year we have looking at the injuries, the | sport and each season
centered learning. conversed on the injuries what are some of the trends of impact, the sports, Ongoing
injuries, where do we see it common in which sport collecting data to identify
Athletic Department Goal common traits
Goal #2: To look at our -Coaching techniques we have been looking at to ensure
injuries of student-athletes. | that we are training, and incorporating good practices
Are these injuries Looking at the pieces of Fall of 2023, and including
preventable? -Is the training to prevent injuries happening, or is over equipment that we order. | this year we have football
training occuring? Do we recondition helmets and shoulder pads
everything? reconditioned along with
-Looking at equipment that we purchase, is it certified, is it other pieces of equipment,
able to be reconditioned ie lacrosse helmets, field
hockey goalie equipment
-look at the off-season as it is paramount to have some
type of training, but there are MPA rules that need to be
followed.
5

District Goal : All RSU 5 -In reviewing the Evaluation it was very ordinary, some -During the school year of | -Fall of 2024 to create a
students regularly engage redundancy in evaluator indicators. The evaluation did not | 2023-24, conducted the new evaluation rubric.
in meaningful student capture the full spectrum of evaluating a coach with evaluations using previous | Meet with Cynthia
centered learning. indicators that align. tool, felt it didn’t capture | Alexander over the next

what | was looking to few weeks
Athletic Department -Looking to capture the evaluation that focus on coaching, | evaluate
2024-25 Goal #3: To communication, professional responsibilities, and -Create a clearer, concise
recreate our coaching relationship with parents, team, school -Started to view other evaluation tool that
evaluation tool to capture district’s coaching address the important
the important criteria to -Developing a new coaching evaluation tool will capture a evaluation to create from | indicators to daily evaluate
observe and evaluate our wider lenses of information and be able to have more pieces our athletic coaches
athletic coaches in the meaningful conversation when it comes to the evaluation
district process -Talk to coaches about the

evaluation process and

most Satisfied, but felt

what would constitute a 3

or a 4 based on the

criteria

6

THem4#4.c.
DCS School Goals 2023-2024
School: Durham Community School
Team Members: DCS Staff
District Goal: Focus on Student Achievement through Improved Student-Centered Teaching and Learning
Strategic Goal 1: All RSU 5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity
From the 2022/23 DEI work these indicators were identified as the priority needs to address for equity and inclusion.
-DCS is a safe space for open communication.
Staff and family data averaged 80% felt positively about this indicator.
48% of students indicated this area as a strength on feedback data from Spring 2023 based on DEI indicators.
-All people are seen and valued for who they are.
Staff and family data averaged 84% felt positively about this indicator.
51% of students indicated this area as a strength on feedback data from Spring 2023 based on DEI indicators.
-People at DCS communicate respectfully with each other.
Staff and family data averaged 86% felt positively about this indicator.
48% of students indicated this area as a strength on feedback data from Spring 2023 based on DEI indicators.
We would like to see each number increase by 10% or more from the student perspective. This survey will be readministered in Spring 2024.
As aresult of this work students will experience a learning environment that honors:
e@ Open dialogue and sharing without judgment
e Easy and comfortable communication
e Use of appropriate and kind language
Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Evidence of Effectiveness
Share with school staff and identify areas Administration / Strategists Clarity across teams about tmpaetfut-pregress
where instruction takes place on montteringitems ways practices aligned to
communication. priority goals would be evident at each grade
level and across content.
1

Documents were created by teams that
highlighted what the skills would look and
sound like at their respective grade levels and
how they would teach the skills.

PD that has a focus on the school CORE values | School Leadership Team Students are easily able to identify the meaning

of Honesty, Empathy, Respect and of each Core Value and how to use them in

Responsibility and reinforce the role they play various scenarios across campus.

in school culture. The school year began with a focus on this
work and each team identified areas they
currently teach and areas for improvement.For
example it was taught and reinforced through
Morning Meetings, Advisory Time, assemblies,
and throughout the day.

PD with staff on strategies to explicitly teach Administration / Staff Staff meeting agendas fall, winter, spring.

the skill of disagreeing respectfully. Focus was on developmentally aligned
language and then developing scenarios to
practice and reinforce with students.

Meet with 7th and 8th graders in advisory Administration / Advisors Student input and strategies acted upon.

groups to get their voices on strategies to use The administrators met with each 7th and 8th

and the role they can play in impacting the grade advisory throughout the year and

goals. gathered their input on ways to improve the
targeted areas and the contributions they could
also make.

Ongoing teaching and reinforcement through All Staff We worked with our Responsive Classroom

Responsive Classroom practices. consultant on ways to strengthen proactive
steps over responsive solutions. This included
revisiting Yardsticks and developmentally
responsive practices.

2

SS

5a 13.6 4 61.1 48.3 Tope

4h 34.7 73.3 iz |

28.6 29.7 22.7 a
eT en tes) Winomr) | | |

18.3 5.9 8 | 67.5 50.8 64

4.8 14.4 13 |

12.7 85 53 {| a 59.5 48.3 57.3

46.8 39.8 42

11.1 17.8 4

3

Develop a strategic and sustainable Develop a SEL team to lead the Administration Team established and meeting
system to provide interventions for work and oversee the process. schedule set.
Social and Emotional Learning. Team met bi-weekly and gave
ongoing updates to the LEadership
Team.
item Cyaan of Sibeol oe Research existing approaches to Administration/ SEL Team Reflected in finished plan.
place for social and emotional MTSS for SEL. The team researched several
learning targets which will support models and approaches and also
students across the grade levels of worked with our Responsive
DCS.. Classroom consultant to make
decisions that would compliment
existing practices.
Develop school specific vision of | Administration/ SEL Team Written documentation
Social Emotional Learning. This work evolved to focussing
our language on ensuring a
positive learning culture and
informed our decision making.
Review current practices of SEL Administration/ SEL Team Resource / skills gaps identified
and identify gaps in service. and action steps established for
addressing needs.
Consistency of Tier 1 practices and
a viable Tier 2 model were
identified as priority needs.
Determine data to be used for Administration/ SEL Team Data process piloted and
identifying levels of need and established.
progress monitoring. This became a key component of
the program selection as it was
imperative that any universal
screener aligned with specific
action steps for resources at the
4

Cc

Identify resources that are needed | Administration/ SEL Team Documentation and plan for

to provide systemic instruction acquiring resources.

across the tiers. Decision was to implement the
CharacterStrong program and
launch it for the school year 24/25.
Budget request was made for
purchasing the program and was
supported and approved.

Create written plan for MTSS for | Administration/ SEL Team Finished plan for MTSS for Social

Social Emotional Learning Emotional Learning.
Decision was to implement the
CharacterStrong program and
launch it for the school year 24/25.

5

DCS School Goals 2024- 2025
School: Durham Community School
Team Members: DCS Staff
District Goal: Focus on Student Achievement through Improved Student-Centered Teaching and Learning
Strategic Goal 1; All RSU 5 students experience a joyful learning climate that is safe, nurturing, and fosters curiosity
DCS Goal #1 Strategies and Action Steps Responsibility Evidence of Effectiveness
Year 2 of 2: Align CharacterStrong practices Learning Culture team and R/C Template for staff to use to plan
Develop and implement a strategic with Responsive Classroom consultant out their R/C and C/S work
and sustainable system to provide practices.
interventions for Social and ; _ ; = : =
Emotional Learning. Plan school schedule to include Administration/ School Leadership | The time for C/S work will be
specific time for CharacterStrong | Team embedded in each grade level’s
Asa result of this work: curriculum schedule.
1. There will be a Multi Tiered | Train leaders for Tier 2 practices | S/W and RTI-B facilitator Attendance at PD training
System of Support in place
for social and emotional Plan and implement PD for all Administration/ Learning Culture | Embedded in PD plans for the
learning which will support | staff to begin the school year. Team launch of the school year.
students across the grade 1
levels of DCS. Establish daily and weekly Administration/ Learning Culture | Daily and weekly practices will be
routines to support Tier 1 work. Team consistently evident across grade
2. There will be a decrease of levels. Including daily
10% in the number of announcements and weekly
individual students referred
Las . messages for staff.
for office disciplinary action
on the behavior reporting Plan and implement ongoing PD _| Administration/ Learning Culture | Staff Meeting / PLD calendar
form. for staff throughout the year for Team
3. There will be anecdotal ve haracterp trong ang
evidence of students using P :
strategies to support their own Launch universal screener for Tier | Learning Culture Team Screener data
and others’ learning. 2 work

Establish an action team to Learning Culture Team Groups created and receiving
synthesize screening data with support based on objective criteria.
attendance, academic, and

behavioral data to establish Tier 2

intervention plans.

Plan and implement Tier 3 PD as | Special Education Team

the materials come on line.

Review and reflect on year 1 School Leadership Team Plans for year 2 of
implementation and plan implementation.

adjustments or ongoing PD as

needed.

ThenL*® 10.8,
Regional School Unit §
Durham » Freeport - Pownal
“To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character, sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.”
Jean Skorapa, Superintendent of Schools Cynthia Alexander, Assistant Superintendent of Schools
Kelly Wentworth, Director of Finance & Human Resources Elisha Morris, Director of Instructional Support
Facilities and Operations Committee
Wednesday, November 6, 2024
5:00 p.m. - Freeport High School
Minutes
Committee Members Present: Malik Farlow, Michelle Ritcheson, Kelly Sink
Committee Members Absent: None
Administrators: Jean Skorapa, Superintendent and Glen Reynolds, Director of Facilities
Agenda Items and Discussion:
1. Meeting called to order by Chair Kelly Sink at 5:05pm
2. Update on FY26 Proposed Capital Projects.
a. Director of Facilities Glen Reynolds shared the FY 26 Proposed Capital! Project
list.
3. Update on current projects.
a. Director of Facilities Glen Reynolds explained the process of how other projects
are captured once they are identified.
b. The committee asked that cost be added to the current spreadsheet.
4. Meeting was adjourned at 5:30pm
17 West Street Freeport, ME 04032 - 207-865-0928

Regional School Unit 5 Pem# J0.C.
Durham - Freeport - Pownal
“To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character, sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.”
Jean Skorapa, Superintendent of Schools Cynthia Alexander, Assistant Superintendent of Schools
Kelly Wentworth, Director of Finance & Human Resources Elisha Morris, Director of Instructional Support
Policy Committee Report
Committee: Policy
Zoom Meeting date: November 4, 2024
Chair: Colin Cheney
Committee Members in attendance: Colin Cheney, Candy deCsipkes, Kara Kaikini, Danielle George
Absent: none
Administrator: Cynthia Alexander, Assistant Superintendent
Guests: none
Review/Revise Policies:
1. Policy Review
none
2. At Board/Superintendent Request
none
3. Required Changes by law:
The following policies were revised and will be brought to the Board for 1st read on November 20, 2024
AC- Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAB- Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Employees
ACAB- R Employee Discrimination/Harassment and title IX Sexual Harassment
Complaint Procedures (Revised into two new procedures ACAB-R1 and ACAB-R2)
The next meeting will be held on December 6, 2024 at 8:45 a.m. by Zoom.
Submitted by: Cynthia Alexander
17 West Street Freeport, ME 04032 - 207-865-0928

7
e e { dt Ly A. d EB.
Regional School Unit 5 Pence u
Durham - Freeport - Pownal
“To inspire and support every learner by challenging minds, building character, sparking creativity, and nurturing passions.”
Jean Skorapa, Superintendent of Schools Cynthia Alexander, Assistant Superintendent of Schools
Kelly Wentworth, Director of Finance & Human Resources Elisha Morris, Director of Instructional Support
TO: Colin Cheney, Candy deCsipkes, Malik Farlow, Cheyenne Farrell, Danielle George, Elisabeth
Munsen, Kara Kaikini, Maura Pillsbury, Michelle Ritcheson, Kelly Sink, Moon Tussing,
Phoebe Williamson
CC: Julie Nickerson, Amanda Marsden, Holly Johnson, Kate Harrison, Amy St.Pierre, Erica
Mullally, Will Pidden, Eric Hall, Peter Wagner, Jen Gulko, Elisha Morris, Jean Skorapa, Paige
Fournier, Emily Grimm, Scott Emery, Charlie Mellon, Kelly Wentworth, Sam Rigby, Glen
Reynolds, Jeremy Arsenault, Jen Winkler, Trevor Bean, Nancy Doherty, Grace Marley, Jill
Hooper, Theresa Clark, Lisa Blier, Heidi Cook, Amanda Chisholm, Eliza Bowen, Heather
Perry, Pam Gee, Caitlyn Hecox
FROM: Cynthia Alexander, Assistant Superintendent of Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment
DATE: November 13, 2024
RE: Review/Update of Policies
At the November 20, 2024 Board of Directors Meeting, the following policies will be on the
agenda:
2"! Read
1. ACAA - Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Students
2. ACAA-R - Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure (Revise
into two new procedures ACAA-R1 and ACAA-R2)
3. JIE - Pregnant Students (New)
1* Read
1. AC- Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
2. ACAB- Harassment and Sexual Harassment of Employees
3. ACAB- R Employee Discrimination/Harassment and Title [IX Sexual Harassment
Complaint Procedures (Revised into two new procedures ACAB-R1 and ACAB-R2)
17 West Street Freeport, ME 04032 - 207-865-0928

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAA
HARASSMENT OF STUDENTS
RSU No. 5 prohibits harassment of students on the basis of:
e@ Race [including traits associated with race involving hair texture, Afro hairstyles
and protective hairstyles such as braids, twists, and locks);
e Sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics
pregnancy, or related conditions;
e Parental, family, or marital status;
e Color;
e Religion;
e Ancestry or national origin
e Age; and
Such conduct is a violation of Board policy and may constitute illegal discrimination under state
and/or federal laws.
School employees, fellow students, volunteers, visitors to the schools, and other individuals
with whom students may interact in order to pursue or engage in education programs and
activities are required to refrain from such conduct.
A. Harassment
Harassment includes but is not limited to, verbal abuse and other unwelcome, offensive
conduct based on the protected categories listed above. Harassment that rises to the level of
physical assault, battery, and/or abuse, and/or bullying behavior are also addressed in Board
Policies JICIA — Weapons, Violence and School Safety and JICK — Bullyina.
B. Sexual/Sex-Based Harassment
Sexual Harassment and other forms of Sex-Based Harassment are addressed under federal and
state laws/regulations. The scope and definitions of sexual/sex-based harassment under these
laws differ, as described below.
1. Sex-Based Harassment Under Title IX
Under the federal Title IX law and its accompanying regulations, sex-based harassment
includes harassment on the basis of sex, including sexual orientation, gender identity,
sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, pregnancy, or related conditions, that is:
1

a. “Quid pro quo” harassment by a school employee, agent, or other person
authorized by the school unit to provide aid, benefit, or service under an
education program or activity, explicitly or impliedly conditioning the
provision of such aid, benefit, or service (such as a better grade or college
recommendation) on the individual’s participation in unwelcome sexual
conduct.

b. “Hostile environment” harassment: Unwelcome sex-based conduct that,
based on the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively
offensive, and is so severe or pervasive that it limits or denies an individual’s
ability to participate in or benefit from the school unit’s education program
or activity (i.e., creates a hostile environment). Whether a hostile
environment has been created is a fact-based inguiry that includes
consideration of a number of factors {identified in ACAA-R2 — Student Sex
Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure).

c. Sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, and stalking, as these
terms are defined in applicable federal laws/regulations.

2. Sexual Harassment Under Maine Law
Under Maine law, sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests
for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual! nature in the following

a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of a student’s educational benefits;

b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a student is used as the basis
for decisions on educational benefits; or

c. Such conduct has the purpose and effect of substantially interfering with a
student’s academic performance, or creates an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive environment.

C. Reports and Complaints of Harassment
All employees (except employees designated by the school unit as “confidential employees” in
regard to sexual/sex-based harassment complaints) are required to report possible incidents of
harassment involving students to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator. Failure to
report such incidents may result in disciplinary action.
Students, parents/guardians, and other individuals are strongly encouraged to report possible
incidents of harassment involving students to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator
so that they can be appropriately addressed.

2

The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator is also available to answer questions and
provide assistance to any individual who is unsure whether harassment has occurred.
Reports of discrimination and harassment of students shall be addressed through ACAA-R1 —
Discrimination and Harassment of Students Complaint Procedure. Reports of sex discrimination,
including sexual/sex-based harassment, are addressed in ACAA-R2 — Student Sex
Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure.
Legal References: Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-12213, as amended by
28 C.F.R. § 35.107.
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504), 29 U.S.C. §
794, as amended by 34 C.F.R. § 104.7.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), 20.U.S.C. 65
1681-1688, as amended by 34 C.F.R. § 106.
Title IV of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000c to 2000c-9.
Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6101 to 6107.
Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S.A. §§ 4551-4634 (2023).
20-A M.R.S.A § 6553 (2019).
MHRC/MDOE Joint Rule Chapter 94-348 and 05-071, ch. 4.
Cross Reference: ACAA-R1 — Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure
ACAA-R2 — Student Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure
AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAB — Harassment of Employees
ACAB-R1 — Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint
Procedure
ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint
Procedure
ACAD — Hazing
GBEBB — Staff Conduct with Students
JICIA — Weapons, Violence and School Safety
JICK — Bullying
JIE — Pregnant Students
3

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAA-R1
STUDENT DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
The RSU No. 5 Board has adopted this student procedure in order to provide prompt and
equitable resolution of complaints of unlawful discrimination and harassment based on race;
color: religion: ancestry or national origin; and disability. Complaints of sex discrimination
including sexual/sex-based harassment, are addressed in ACAA-R2 — Student Sex
Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure. |In cases where allegations include sex
discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment and one or more other protected categories,
ACAA-R2 will be used.
Complaints alleging unlawful discrimination and harassment of an employee are addressed
under ACAB-R1 - Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure or ACAB-R2 —
Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure,
Any individual who is unsure about whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred, and/or which complaint procedure applies, is encouraged to contact one of the
Affirmative Action Officers/Title IX Coordinators.
AAO/TITLE IX COORDINATORS’ INFORMATION:
Cynthia Alexander, Charlie Mellon,
Assistant Superintendent Assistant Principal, FHS
17 West Street 30 Holbrook Rd.
Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
207-865-0928 207-865-4706
alexanderc@rsu5.org mellonc@rsu5.orq

Section 1. Definitions
For purposes of this complaint procedure, the following definitions will be used.

A. “Discrimination or harassment”: Discrimination or harassment on the basis of an
individual’s membership in a protected category.

B. “Discrimination”: Treating individuals differently or interfering with or preventing them
from enjoying the advantages or privileges afforded to others because of their
membership in a protected category.

1

C. “Harassment”: Oral, written, graphic, electronic, or physical conduct relating to an
individual’s actual or perceived membership in a protected category that is sufficiently
severe or pervasive so as to interfere with or limit that individual’s ability to participate
in the school unit’s education program or activities by creating a hostile, intimidating, or
offensive environment.

D. “Complaint” is defined as an allegation that a student has been discriminated against or
harassed on the basis of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, or disability.

Section 2. Complaint Procedure

This procedure should be used to address any report or complaint of unlawful discrimination or
harassment based on a protected category which does not involve sex discrimination or
sexual,/sex-based harassment.

A. How to Make a Complaint
1. School employees are required to promptly make a report to the AAO/Title IX

Coordinator if they have reason to believe that a student has been discriminated
against or harassed.

2. Students (and others) who believe that they or another student has been harassed
or discriminated against should report their concern promptly to the AAO/T itle IX
Coordinator.

3. The individual making the report must provide basic information concerning the
allegation of discrimination or harassment (i.e., date, time, location, individuals
involved, nature of the allegation(s)) to the AAO/Title IX Coordinator. If the report is
made orally, the AAO/Title IX Coordinator will document it.

4. Ifthe individual is unsure as to whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred or needs assistance in preparing a complaint, they are encouraged to
discuss the matter with the AAO/Title IX Coordinator.

5. Individuals will not be retaliated against for reporting suspected discrimination or
harassment or for participating in an investigation. Retaliation is illegal under federal
and state nondiscrimination laws, and any retaliation will result in disciplinary action
up to and including termination for employees and expulsion for students.

6. Individuals are encouraged to utilize the school unit’s complaint procedure.
However, individuals are hereby notified that they also have the right to report
incidents of discrimination or harassment to:

2

e Maine Human Rights Commission, 51 State House Station, Augusta, Maine
04333; telephone: 207-624-6290: website: hitps:////wwow.mhre.gov/mbre/;
and/or

e Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education, 5 Post Office Square, gh
Floor, Boston, MA 02109-3921 (telephone: 617-289-0111; website:
https://ocrcas.ed.gov/contact-ocrefield_state_value=688,

B. Complaint Handling and Investigation

1. The AAQ/Title IX Coordinator will promptly inform the Superintendent and the
person who is the subject of the complaint (respondent) that a complaint has been
received.

a. Ifthe allegations include sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment,
ACAA-R2 will be followed instead of this procedure.

2. The AAQ/Title IX Coordinator may pursue an informal resolution of the complaint
with the agreement of the parties involved. Any party to the complaint may decide
to end the informal resolution process and pursue the formal process at any point.
Any informal resolution is subject to the approval of the parties and the
Superintendent, who shall consider whether the resolution is in the best interest of
the school unit and the parties in light of the particular circumstances and applicable
policies and laws.

3. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator may implement supportive measures for a student to
reduce the risk of further discrimination or harassment of the student while an
investigation is pending. Examples of supportive measures include but are not
limited to, ordering no contact between the individuals involved, changing class
schedules, or other steps.

4. The complaint will be investigated by a trained internal or external individual
designated by the Superintendent and one of the AAQ/Title IX Coordinators. Any
complaint about an employee who holds a supervisory position shall be investigated
by a person who is not subject to that supervisor’s authority. Any complaint about
the Superintendent should be submitted to the Board Chair, who should consult with
legal counsel concerning the handling and investigation of the complaint.

5. The investigator shall consult with the AAO/Title IX Coordinator as appropriate
during the investigation process.

6. The respondent will be provided with an opportunity to be heard as part of the
investigation.

3

7. The complainant and the respondent may suggest witnesses to be interviewed
and/or submit materials they believe are relevant to the complaint.

8. Ifthe complaint is against an employee of the school unit, any rights conferred under
an applicable collective bargaining agreement will be applied.

9. Privacy rights of all parties to the complaint shall be maintained in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws.

10. The investigation will be completed within forty (40) school days of receiving the
complaint, if practicable.

11. The investigator will provide a written report and findings to the AAO/Title IX
Coordinator.

C. Findings and Subsequent Actions

1. The AAO/Title IX Coordinator shall consult with the Superintendent concerning the
investigation and findings.

2. Ifthere is a finding that discrimination or harassment occurred, the AAO/Title IX
Coordinator, in consultation with the Superintendent, shall:

a. Determine what remedial action(s), if any, are required to end the
discrimination or harassment, remedy its effect, and prevent recurrence; and

b. Determine what disciplinary action(s) should be taken against the
individual(s} who engaged in discrimination or harassment, if any.

3. Inform the complainant and the respondent in writing of the results of the
investigation and its resolution {in accordance with applicable state and federal
privacy laws).

D. Appeals
1. After the conclusion of the investigation, the complainant or respondent may seek
an appeal of the findings solely on the basis of either:
a. Prejudicial procedural error; or
b. The discovery of previously unavailable relevant evidence that could
significantly impact the outcome.

2. Appeals must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent within five (5) school

days after receiving notice of the resolution.
4

3. Upon receipt of a valid appeal, the Superintendent shall provide notice to the other
party, along with an opportunity to provide a written statement within five (5) school
days.

4. The Superintendent shall review the available documentation and may conduct
further investigation if deemed appropriate.

5. The Superintendent’s decision on the appeal will be provided to the parties within
ten (10) school days, if practicable. The Superintendent’s decision is final.

E. Records
The AAO/Title 1X Coordinator will keep a written record of the complaint process and actions
taken.
Cross References: AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAA — Harassment of Students
ACAA-R2 — Student Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure
JIE - Pregnant Students
5

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAA-R2
STUDENT SEX DISCRIMINATION/HARASSMENT COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
The Board has adopted this student procedure in order to provide prompt and equitable
resolution of reports and complaints of unlawful sex discrimination, including allegations of
sexual harassment and other forms of sex-based harassment, as described in Policies AC —
Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action and ACAA — Harassment of
Students,
Although the specific provisions under Title IX and Maine law differ somewhat in regard to sex
discrimination and sexual/sex-based harassment, the Board has chosen to address all such
complaints under this procedure, which meets all Title IX and Maine law requirements.
Complaints alleging unlawful discrimination or harassment of a student on the basis of other
protected categories (race; color; religion; ancestry or national origin: and disability) are
addressed under ACAA-Ri — Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure.
Complaints alleging unlawful discrimination and harassment of an employee are addressed
under ACAB-R1 - Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure or ACAB-R2 —
Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure.
Any individual who i re about r unlawful discriminati rassment
occurred and/or which complaint procedure applies is encouraged to contact the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.
AAO/TITLE IX COORDINATORS’ INFORMATION:
Cynthia Alexander, Charlie Melion,
Assistant Superintendent Assistant Principal, FHS
17 West Street 30 Holbrook Rd.
Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
207-865-0928 207-865-4706
alexanderc@rsu5.org mellonc@rsu5.orq
INFORMATION FOR ONE CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE PER SCHOOL:
Lexi Triagiani, DCS Kelley Ryder-Herzog, MSS Susan Albertini, MLS
School Counselor School Counselor School Counselor
654 Hallowell Rd. 21 Morse St. 20 Mollyhauk Lane
Durham, ME 04222 Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
207-353-9333 207-865-6361 207-865-4561
triggianil@rsu5.org herzogk@rsu5.org albertinis@rsu5.org
1

Phyllis Latham, FMS Rachel Lira, FHS Cathryn Bigley, PES
School Counselor Social Worker School Counselor
19 Kendall Lane 30 Holbrook Rd. 587 Elmwood Rd.
Freeport, ME 04032 Freenort, ME 04032 Pownall, NiE 04069
207-865-6051 207-865-4706 207-688-4832
lathamp@rsu5.orgq lirar@rsu5.org bigleyc@rsu5.org
Section 1. Definitions
For purposes of this complaint procedure, the following definitions will be used.

A. “Complainant” means [1] the student victim of alleged sex discrimination (including
sexual/sex-based harassment); or (2) other victim of alleged sex discrimination
(including sexual/sex-based harassment) who was participating or attempting to
participate in the school unit’s education programs or activities at the time of the alleged
sex discrimination.

B. “Complaint” under the Title 1X regulations: An oral or written request to RSU No. 5 to
investigate and make a determination about alleged discrimination under Title IX.”_ An
oral request for investigation should be documented by the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

C. “Confidential employee” means (1) an employee of the school unit whose
communications are privileged or confidential under federal or state law. The
employee’s confidential status, for purposes of Title IX. is only with respect to
information received while the employee is functioning within the scope of their duties
to which privilege or confidentiality applies; or (2) an employee of the school unit
designated as confidential for the purpose of providing services to persons related to sex
discrimination (in which case the employee’s confidential status applies only to
information received about sex discrimination in connection with providing those
services).

D. “Discrimination”: Treating individuals differently or interfering with or preventing them
from enjoying the advantages or privileges afforded to others because of their
membership ina protected category.

E. “Gender identity”: The gender-related identity, anpearance, mannerisms or other
gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the individual’s assigned sex
at birth.”

F. “Parental status”: The status of a person who, with respect to another person who is
under the age of 18 or who is 18 or older but is incapable of self-care because of a

2

physical or mental disability, is: (1) a biological parent: (2) an adoptive parent; (3) a

foster parent: (4) a stepparent; (5) a legal custodian or guardian; (6) in loco parentis with

respect to such a person; or (7) actively seeking legal custody, guardianship, visitation, or
adoption of such a person.”

G. “Party”: A complainant or respondent.

H. “Pregnancy and related conditions” includes “(1) Pregnancy, childbirth, termination of
pregnancy, or lactation; (2) Medical conditions related to pregnancy, childbirth,
termination of pregnancy, or lactation: or (3) Recovery from pregnancy, childbirth,
termination of pregnancy, lactation, or related medical conditions.”

|. “Respondent”: A person who is alleged to have violated the school unit’s prohibition on
sex discrimination.

J. “Retaliation” under Title 1X: intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against any
person by the school unit, a student, or an employee or other person authorized by the
recipient to provide aid, benefit, or services under the [school unit’s] education program
or activity, for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by Title
IX/regulations, or because the person has reported information, made a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participating or refused to participate in any manner in an
investigation, proceeding, or other action taken by a school unit in regard to allegations
of sex discrimination.”

K. “Sex-based harassment” under Title IX: Harassment on the basis of sex, including sexual
orientation, gender identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, pregnancy, or related
conditions, that meets one of the following:

1. “Quid pro quo” harassment by a school employee, agent, or other person authorized
by the school unit to provide aid, benefit, or service under an education program or
activity, explicitly or impliedly conditioning the provision of such aid, benefit, or
service on the individual’s participation in unwelcome sexual conduct.

2. “Hostile environment” harassment: Unwelcome sex-based conduct that, based on
the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively offensive and is so
severe or pervasive that it limits or denies an individual’s ability to participate in or
benefit from the school unit’s education program or activity {i.e., creates a hostile
environment). A school unit is obligated to address a sex-based hostile environment
under its education program or activity, even when some conduct alleged to be
contributing to the hostile environment occurred outside the recipient's education
program or activity. Whether a hostile environment has been created is a fact-based
inquiry that includes consideration of a number of factors.

3

a. Factors to consider in regard to the creation of a “hostile environment”: “{i) the
degree to which the conduct affected the complainant’s ability to access the
RSUS5’s education program or activity; (ii) the type, frequency, and duration of the
conduct: (iii) the parties’ ages, roles within the RSU5’s education program or
activity, previous interactions, and other factors about each party that may be
relevant to evaluating the effects of the conduct: (iv) the location of the conduct
and the context in which the conduct occurred; and |v) other sex-based
harassment in RSU5’s education program or activity.”

3. Sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, and stalking, as these terms are
defined below or in the Title IX regulations.

a. “Sexual assault” is an offense classified as a forcible or nonforcible sex offense
under the uniform reporting system of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Such
offenses include but are not limited to rape, sodomy, sexual assault with an
object, and fondling.

b. “Dating violence” is violence committed by a person: (a) who is or has been in a
social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim; (b) where the
existence of such a relationship shall be determined based on a consideration of
the following factors: (1) the length of the relationship, (2) the type of
relationship: and (3) the frequency of interaction between the persons involved
in the relationship.”

c. “Stalking”: Engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that
would cause a reasonable person to: (a) fear for the person’s safety or the safety
of others; or (b) suffer substantial emotional distress.”

L. “Sexual harassment” under Maine law: Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual
favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature in the following
situations:

a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of a student’s educational benefits:

b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a student is used as the basis
for decisions on educational benefits: or

c. Such conduct has the purpose and effect of substantially interfering with a
student’s academic performance, or creates an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive environment.

M. “Sexual orientation”: Under Maine law: A person’s “actual or perceived heterosexuality,
bisexuality, homosexuality, or gender identity or expression.” Sexual orientation is also
covered by Title IX.

N. “Student”: A person enrolled in the school unit.

4

Section 2. Complaint Procedure
This procedure should be used to address any report or complaint of sex discrimination or
sexual/sex-based harassment of a student.

A. Reports of Alleged Sex Discrimination or Sexual/Sex-Based Harassment

1. Any school unit employee (except for designated confidential employees) who
receives a report or has reason to believe that a student may have been
discriminated against or harassed on the basis of sex is required to promptly notify
the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

2. Confidential employees who receive a report that a student may have experienced
sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment must inform the person making
the report that the employee is designated “confidential” and inform them of the
circumstances in which the employee is not required to make a report to the
Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator. The confidential employee will
provide the reporter with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator’s
contact information and explain that the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator may be able to offer and coordinate supportive measures, initiate an
informal resolution process, or initiate an investigation under this complaint
procedure.

3. Students (and others) who believe that they or another student has been
discriminated against or harassed on the basis of sex should report their concern
promptly to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator. The report will be
documented by the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

4. The individual making the report should provide basic, available information orally or
in writing concerning the allegation (i.e., individuals involved, date, time, location,
and type of allegation). If the information is conveyed orally, the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title 1X Coordinator will document it.

5. If.an individual is unsure as to whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred, they are encouraged to discuss the matter with the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

6. Individuals will not be retaliated against for reporting suspected discrimination or
harassment or for participating in an investigation. Retaliation is illegal under
federal/state nondiscrimination laws and Board policies, and any retaliation will
result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination for employees and
expulsion for students.

5

7. The Superintendent will be promptly notified of all reports of alleged discrimination
or harassment of a student.

8. Students and others are encouraged to utilize this complaint procedure. However,
individuals are hereby notified that they also have the right to report incidents of
discrimination or harassment to:

® Maine Human Rights Commission, 51 State House Station, Augusta, Maine
04333; telephone: 207-624-6290; website: httns://www.maine.gov/mhrc/):
and/or

e Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education, 5 Post Office Square, 8"
Floor, Boston, MA 02109-3921 (telephone: 617-289-0111; website:
https://ocrcas.ed.gov/contact-ocr?field_state_value=688).

B. Processing of Complaints

1. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will treat complainants and
respondents equitably through the complaint procedure.

2. Ifthe individual making the report is the alleged victim, or if the alleged victim is
identified by the individual making the report, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator will meet with the alleged victim to discuss the allegations and
supportive measures that may be appropriate in the particular circumstances and to
explain the complaint procedure.

If the alleged victim is unknown to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator,
the person who made the report will be notified of the availability of the complaint
procedure.

3. Supportive Measures

a. Supportive measures are individualized measures designed to ensure the
student can continue to access educational! programs and activities (including
but not limited to requiring no contact between individuals. changing
schedules, classes, extracurricular activities, etc.).

b. Supportive measures must not unreasonably burden either party and must
be designed to protect the safety of the parties or the school unit’s
educational! environment or to provide support during the complaint
procedure or an informal resolution process. The school unit may not impose
such measures for punitive or disciplinary reasons.

c. Supportive measures may be continued even if a complaint or informal
resolution process is not initiated, or after the conclusion of such processes, if
appropriate under the circumstances.

6

d. Complainants and respondents must be provided with a timely opportunity
to seek, from an appropriate and impartial emplovee, modification or
reversal of a decision to provide, deny, modify, or terminate supportive
measures applicable to them. This employee must not be the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator and must have the authority to modify or
reverse the decision.

e. Complainants and respondents also have the opportunity to seek additional
modification or termination of a supportive measure applicable to them if
circumstances change.

f The school unit will not disclose information about supportive measures to
persons other than the person to whom they apply unless it is necessary to
provide a supportive measure or to restore or preserve a party’s access to
education programs and activities. ~

g. Ifacomplainant or respondent is a student with a disability, the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will consult with one or more members of
the student’s IEP team or Section 504 Team, if any, to determine how to
comply with the reauirements of the IDEA and Section 504 in implementing
supportive measures.

4. \f the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator reasonably determines that the
conduct alleged does not involve illegal discrimination or harassment, the school unit
is not obligated to initiate the complaint process and may dismiss the complaint (See
Subsection C.1. below). If the alleged conduct potentially violates other laws, Board
policies/procedures, or professional expectations [in the case of employees), the
matter may be referred to the Superintendent and/or other appropriate
administrator(s) to address as deemed appropriate.

5. In response to a complaint alleging prohibited sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based
harassment, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will initiate the
complaint process or the informal resolution process lif available and appropriate)
according to this procedure. When feasible, the decision to initiate an investigation
or informal resolution process or dismiss the complaint will be made within ten (10)
school days of receipt of the complaint.

6. Incertain circumstances, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator may
initiate the investigation process, even when the alleged victim chooses not to, after
any or all allegations are withdrawn by the alleged victim, or when an informal
resolution process is not initiated or is terminated. To make this fact-specific
determination, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will consider, ata
minimum:

a. The complainant’s request not to proceed with initiating a complaint;
b. The complainant’s reasonable safety concerns regarding initiating a
complaint;
7

c. The risk that additional acts of discrimination or harassment would occur ifa
complaint is not initiated;

d. The severity of the alleged discrimination or harassment, including whether
the discrimination, if established, would require the removal of arespondent
from school or imposition of another disciplinary sanction to end the
discrimination or harassment and prevent its recurrence;

e. The age and relationship of the parties, including whether the respondent is
an employee of the school unit;

f. The scope of the alleged discrimination or harassment, including information
suggesting a pattern, ongoing discrimination/harassment, or
discrimination/harassment alleged to have impacted multiple individuals;

g. The availability of evidence to assist a decisionmaker in determining whether
discrimination or harassment occurred; and

h. Whether the school unit could end the alleged discrimination or harassment
and prevent its recurrence without initiating the complaint procedure.

If, after considering these and any other factors that may be relevant, the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator determines that the alleged conduct presents an
imminent and serious threat to the health or safety af the complainant or other
individuals, or that the alleged conduct prevents the school unit from ensuring equal
access to its education programs and activities, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator may initiate a complaint.

7. Ifthe Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator initiates a complaint, the
complainant will receive prior notice, and any reasonable safety concerns will be
addressed.

8. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will confirm the initiation of an
investigation or informal resolution process in writing to both parties. The
communication will include a) a copy of the complaint procedure: b) sufficient
information available at the time to allow the parties to respond to the allegations
(including the identities of the parties involved the conduct alleged to constitute sex
discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment, and the date(s) and location(s) of the
alleged incident(s); c) notice that retaliation is prohibited: and d) notice that the
parties are entitled to an equal opportunity to access the relevant and not otherwise
impermissible evidence.

9. Regardless of whether an investigation is initiated, the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator will take appropriate, prompt and effective steps to
ensure that discrimination or harassment does not continue or recur. The
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will also coordinate supportive

measures, aS appropriate.
8

10. If a complainant or respondent is a student with a disability, the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title 1X Coordinator will consult with one or more members of the student’s
IEP team or 504 Team, if any, to determine how to comply with the requirements of
the IDEA and Section 504 during the course of the complaint procedure.

11. If the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator decides to investigate additional
allegations of discrimination or harassment made by the complainant against the
respondent after the parties received notice of the complaint, the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator will notify the parties of the additional allegations in
writing.

12. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may consolidate complaints of
discrimination or harassment against more than one respondent, by more than one
complainant against one or more respondents, or by one party against another party
when the allegations arise out of the same facts or circumstances.

13. The school unit will presume that the respondent is not responsible for alleged
discrimination or harassment until a determination is made at the conclusion of the
investigation.

14. The school unit will take reasonable steps to protect the privacy of the parties and
witnesses during the complaint procedure and will comply with applicable state and
federal privacy laws. These steps will not restrict the ability of the parties to obtain
and present evidence, including by speaking to witnesses; consult with their family:
confidential employees/resources; or otherwise prepare for and participate in the
complaint procedure.

C. Dismissal of Complaints

1. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may dismiss a complaint in the
following circumstances:

a. The school unit is unable to identify a respondent after taking reasonable
steps to do so:

b. The respondent is not participating in the school unit’s education programs
and activities, or is not employed by the school unit:

c. The complainant voluntarily withdraws any or all allegations in the complaint,
the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator declines to initiate a
complaint and determines that, without the complainant’s withdrawn
allegations, the alleged conduct remaining, if any, would not constitute
discrimination or harassment even if proven: or

d. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator determines that the
conduct alleged in the complaint, even if proven, would not constitute
discrimination or harassment under state/federal laws and regulations.

9

2. Upon dismissal, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator will promptly
notify the complainant (and the respondent if they had received notice of the
complaint allegations) of the basis for the dismissal and provide the opportunity to
appeal the dismissal.

3. Dismissals may be appealed on the following bases:

a. Procedural irregularity that would change the outcome;

b. New evidence that would change the outcome and that was not reasonably
available when the dismissal [or determination in the case] was made; and

c. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator, investigator, or
decisionmaker had a conflict or bias for or against complainants or
respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent that
would change the outcome.

4. An appeal of a complaint dismissal must be made in writing to the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator within five (5) school days and state the basis for the
appeal.

5. Ifthe dismissal is appealed, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall:

a. Notify the respondent of the appeal if they had received notice of the
complaint allegations:

b. Implement the appeal procedure equally for the parties;

c. Ensure that the trained decisionmaker for the appeal did not take part in an
investigation of the allegations or dismissal of the complaint:

d. Provide the parties a reasonable and equal opportunity to make a statement
in support of, or challenging, the outcome: and

e. Notify the parties in writing of the result of the appeal and the rationale for it
within five (5) school days, if feasible.

6. When a complaint is dismissed, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator
will, ata minimum:

a. Offer supportive measures to the complainant and respondent if appropriate:
and

b. Take other prompt and effective steps, as appropriate, to ensure that
discrimination or harassment does not continue or recur within the school
unit’s program or activity.

7. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will document actions taken
during the appeal process.
10

D. Emergency Removal of a Student

The Superintendent may remove a student from education programs and activities on an

emergency basis during the complaint procedure. provided:

A. There is a determination, following an individualized safety and risk analysis, that a
student respondent presents an imminent and serious threat to the health or safety
of a complainant, or any students, employees, or other persons arising from the
allegations of discrimination or harassment, that justifies emergency removal.

B. The respondent and the student’s parent/legal guardian will be provided with an
immediate opportunity to challenge the decision following the removal, and has the
burden of demonstrating that such removal is unreasonable.

C. Any such removal shall be made in compliance with any applicable disability laws
including the IDEA, Section 504, and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

D. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will document actions taken
during the emergency removal process.

[Note: An employee may be placed on administrative leave during a complaint

procedure, pursuant to the school unit’s customary process regarding administrative

leave of employees]
E. Informal Resolution Process

1. Informal resolution is not permitted in cases where a student is the complainant and
an employee is the respondent to alleged sex discrimination or harassment.

2. The Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may, if appropriate, offer the parties the
opportunity to resolve the com plaint through an informal resolution process at any
point prior to an investigation or determination of responsibility, Engaging in an
informal resolution process is voluntary on the part of each party. The Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator also may decline to pursue an informal resolution
despite a party’s request (for exam ple, if the alleged conduct presents a future risk of
harm to the complainant or others).

3. Both (or all) parties must voluntarily agree in writing to participate in an informal
resolution process, and a party may withdraw from the process at any time. The
parties will not be required to attend meetings together unless they voluntarily agree
to do so.

4. Before initiating an informal resolution process, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title
IX Coordinator will ensure that the parties receive notice of: i.) the allegations; ii.)

11

the requirements of the informal resolution process; ii.) the right of any party to
withdraw from the process and initiate or resume the investigation process: iv.) that
the parties’ agreement to an informal resolution would preclude them from initiating
or resuming the investigation: v.) potential terms that may be requested or offered in
an informal resolution agreement, including notice that an agreement is binding on
the parties: and vi.) what information the school unit will maintain regarding the
informal resolution process.

[Note: Informal resolutions can take many forms depending on the particular case
including but not limited to: restrictions on contact between the parties; facilitated
discussions between the parties: restorative justice; acknowledgment of
responsibility by a respondent; apologies; restrictions on attendance or participation
in programs and activities: disciplinary actions or requirements to engage in specific
services: or supportive measures.

5. The facilitator for the informal resolution process must be trained, cannot be the
same person as the investigator or decisionmaker in the matter, and must not have a
conflict of interest or bias regarding parties to such matters generally or to an
individual complainant or respondent.

6. The Superintendent must agree to the terms of any informal resolution reached
between the parties, considering whether the resolution is in the best interest of the
parties and the school unit in light of the particular circumstances. applicable
laws/regulations, and Board policies.

7. {fan informal resolution agreement is reached, it will be agreed to in writing by both
parties and the Affirmative Action Office/Title IX Coordinator. Any such agreement is
final and binding on the parties.

F. Investigation Process

1. The complaint will be investigated by a trained internal or external individual
designated by the Superintendent and the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator, The investigator shall not have a conflict of interest or bias against
complainants or respondents generally, or an individual complainant or respondent,
and will consult with the Affirmative Action Officer/1 itle IX Coordinator during the
investigation process.

2. Any complaint about an employee who holds a supervisory position will be
investigated by a person not subject to that supervisor’s authority. Any complaint
about the Superintendent will be submitted to the Board Chair, who will consult with
legal counsel concerning the handling and investigation of the complaint.

12

3. The burden is on the school unit, and not the parties, to gather sufficient evidence
(through the investigation) in order to determine whether illegal discrimination or
harassment occurred.

4. The investigator shall provide an opportunity for the complainant and respondent to
be heard as part of the investigation. The parties will not be required to attend
meetings together.

5. The parties may suggest witnesses to be interviewed and/or submit materials that
they believe are relevant to the allegations and complaint.

6. The investigator will evaluate evidence that is relevant and not otherwise
impermissible, including both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence. Credibility
determinations will not be based on a person’s status as a complainant, respondent,
or witness.

a. The Title IX regulations define “relevant” as “related to the allegations of sex
discrimination under investigation. Questions are relevant when they seek
evidence that may aid in showing whether the alleged sex discrimination
occurred, and evidence is relevant when it may aid a decisionmaker in
determining whether the alleged sex discrimination occurred.”

7. The following types of evidence, and questions seeking that evidence, are
impermissible:

a. Evidence that is protected under a privilege recognized by federal or
state law, or evidence provided to a confidential employee, unless the person
to whom the privilege or confidentiality is owed has voluntarily waived the
privilege or confidentiality in writing.

b. A party’s or witness’s records that are made or maintained by a physician
psychologist, or other recognized professional or paraprofessional in
connection with the treatment to the party or witness, unless the school unit
obtains that party's or witness’s voluntary, written consent for use in the
complaint procedure; and

a. Evidence that relates to the complainant’s sexual interests or prior sexual
conduct, unless evidence about the complainant’s prior sexual conduct is
offered to prove that someone other than the respondent committed alleged
sexual/sex-based harassment or is evidence about specific incidents of the
complainant’s prior sexual conduct with the respondent that is offered to
prove consent to the alleged sexual/sex-based harassment. The fact of prior
sexual conduct between the complainant and respondent does not by itself
demonstrate or imply the complainant’s consent to the alleged sex-based
harassment or preclude a determination that sex-based harassment
occurred.

13

8. The investigator will provide each party with the opportunity to review the evidence
that is relevant to the allegations of discrimination or harassment (and not otherwise
impermissible), and to respond to it.

9. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator and investigator will take
reasonable steps to prevent and address the parties’ unauthorized disclosure of
information and evidence obtained solely through the complaint procedure.
Disclosure of such information and evidence for the purposes of administering
administrative proceedings or litigation related to the complaint is authorized.

10. The investigator will conclude the investigation and issue a written report to the
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator within forty (40) school days, if
feasible.

a. Ifthe investigator has been charged with making a determination of
responsibility/non-responsibility with respect to each allegation, such
determination(s) and the reasons shall be included in the report.

11. Extensions of time may be granted to complete the investigation if approved by the
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator for reasonable cause. Notice of any
extension and the reasons will be provided to the parties.

G. Determinations of Responsibility

1. The standard used to determine whether illegal discrimination or harassment
occurred is the preponderance of the evidence standard (“more likely than not”).

2. The decisionmaker will review the investigation report and the evidence gathered (as
appropriate) and will have the discretion to conduct additional interviews of parties
and/or witnesses if needed to assess credibility.

3. The decisionmaker will make a written determination of
responsibility/non-responsibility in regard to each allegation and the reasons, which
shall be shared with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator and the
parties.

4. Ingeneral, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will notify the parties
of the determination decision(s} within five (5) school days of the determination

being reached. Reasonable extensions of time may be approved by the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator for good reason. The notification will include the
permissible bases for appeal and the deadline for receipt of appeals.
14

5. Ifthere is a determination that the respondent is responsible for violations, the
appropriate administrator will make decisions as to appropriate disciplinary action
and remedies.
6. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall, as appropriate:
a. Coordinate the provision and implementation of remedies to a complainant
and any other persons if necessary to provide equal access to the school
unit’s educational programs and activities that had been limited or denied by
discrimination or harassment;
b. Coordinate the imposition of any disciplinary sanctions on a respondent
including notification to the complainant of any such disciplinary sanctions;
and
c. Take other appropriate prompt and effective steps if necessary to ensure
discrimination and harassment does not continue or recur.
7. Adetermination of responsibility becomes final on the date that the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator provides the parties with the written determination of the
results of the appeal if an appeal is filed. If an appeal is not filed, the determination of
responsibility becomes final on the date on which the appeal would no longer be
considered timely.
8. The school unit will not discipline a party, witness. or others participating in the
complaint procedure for making a false statement or for engaging in consensual sexual
conduct based solely on the determination whether sex discrimination or
sexual/sex-based harassment occurred.
H. Remedies, Discipline, and Other Actions
1. Remedies
Remedies are measures used to ensure that the complainant has equal access to the schoo!
unit’s education programs and activities following the decisionmaker’s determination(s). Such
remedies may include supportive measures and may include other appropriate measures,
depending on the determination(s) and the needs of the complainant. The Affirmative Action
Officer/Title 1X Coordinator is responsible for implementing remedies and providing any needed
assistance to the complainant.

2. Discipline and Other Actions
Examples of disciplinary and other actions that may be imposed on a student when there is a
determination that they are responsible for one or more violations of sexual,/sex-based
harassment include suspension, expulsion, restorative justice, required education or counseling,
and other measures.

15

Examples of disciplinary actions that may be imposed on an employee when there isa
determination that they are responsible for one or more violations of sexual/sex-based
harassment include: written warning, probation, counseling demotion, suspension without pay,
termination.

1. Appeals

1. After the conclusion of the investigation and decision maker determination(s), the
complainant or respondent may seek an appeal of the findings based on the
following factors:

a. Procedural irregularity that would change the outcome;

b. New evidence that would change the outcome and that was not reasonably
available when the determination was made; and

c. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator, investigator, or decision
maker had a conflict or bias for or against complainants or respondents
generally, or the individual complainant or respondent that would change the
outcome.

2. The appeal must be made in writing to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title Ix
Coordinator within five (5) school days and state the basis for the appeal.

3. The Superintendent is responsible for making a determination on the appeal. The
Superintendent will conduct an impartial review of the appeal, including
consideration of the written record in the case, and may consult with legal counsel or
other school unit officials in making their decision.

4. The Superintendent will issue the appeal determination in writing within ten (10)
school days of receipt of the appeal, if feasible.

5. The Superintendent’s decision is final.

Section 3. Recordkeeping
The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall maintain a record of documents and
action in each case, and records of trainings provided, for a period of seven (7) years.
Cross References: AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAA — Harassment of Students
ACAA-R1 — Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure
ACAB — Harassment of Employees
ACAB-Ri — Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint
Procedure
16

ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint
Procedure
JIE - Pregnant Students

17

NEPN/NSBA CODE: JIE
PREGNANT STUDENTS
The RSU No. 5 Board has adopted this policy to comply with its obligations not to discriminate
in its education programs and activities against students based on a student’s current, potential,
or past pregnancy or related conditions. The Title IX Coordinator is responsible for
implementing this procedure _in consultation with the Superintendent, Affirmative Action
Officer, and others as appropriate.
For the purposes of this policy, pregnancy or related conditions includes:
e@ Pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or lactation;
e Medical conditions related to pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, or
lactation; or
e Recovery from pregnancy, childbirth, termination of pregnancy, lactation, or related
medical conditions.
A. Notifications
When_a student or their parent/guardian informs any RSU No. 5 employee of a student’s
pregnancy or related condition(s), the employee must promptly provide the student or the
parent/legal guardian with the Title IX Coordinator’s contact information so that the Title IX
Coordinator can take any necessary actions to ensure the student’s equal access to the school
unit’s education programs and_ activities. The employee should also notify the Title IX
Coordinator of the pregnancy or related condition(s), unless the employee reasonably believes
that the Title IX Coordinator has already been notified.
Once the Title IX Coordinator is informed of a student pregnancy, they shall inform the student
(or the parent/legal guardian if they informed the Title IX Coordinator), of the school unit’s
obligations (outlined below) and provide a copy of Board Policy AC.
B. Reasonable Modifications
1. Reasonable modifications to the school unit’s policies, procedures, and practices
shall be made to prevent sex discrimination and ensure equal access to education
programs and activities based on the student’s individualized needs. The Title 1X
Coordinator will consult with the student regarding any such modifications.
Modifications that fundamentally alter the nature of an education program or
activity are not considered “reasonable” under Title IX regulations.
1

2. The student has the discretion to accept or decline each reasonable modification
offered. If astudent accepts a modification, the Title IX Coordinator will see that it is
implemented.

3. Reasonable modifications may include, but are not limited to:

a. Breaks during class to express breast milk, breastfeed, or attend to health needs
associated with pregnancy or related conditions (such as eating, drinking, or
using the restroom);

b. Intermittent absences to attend medical appointments:

c. Access to online or homebound education;

d. Change in schedule or course sequence;

e. Extensions of time for coursework and rescheduling of tests and examinations;

f. Allowing a student to sit or stand, or carry or keep water nearby;

g. Counseling:

h. Changes in physical space or supplies (such_as_ access to a larger desk or a
footrest):

i. Elevator access; and/or

j. Other reasonable changes in policies, procedures, or practices.

C. Voluntary Access to Separate and Comparable Portions of Education Programs or

Activities

1. If the school unit offers a separate and comparable portion of an education program
or_activity, the student _must voluntarily agree to participate in such program or
activity.

D. Voluntary Leave of Absence

1. The school unit shall! allow a student to voluntarily be absent from school to cover, at
a minimum, the period of time deemed medically necessary by the student’s
licensed health care provider.

2. When the student returns to the school unit’s education programs and activities,
they shall be reinstated to the academic status, and to the extent practical, any
extracurricular status, that they held prior to the voluntary leave.

E. Lactation Space

1. The student shall be able to access a lactation space, other than a bathroom, that is
clean, shielded from view, free from intrusion from others, and may be used by the
student for expressing breast milk or breastfeeding as needed.

2

F. Limits on Requiring Documentation

1. The Title IX Coordinator shall not require supporting doctumentation from the
student, except to the extent it is necessary and reasonable to determine the
re le modifications to make or to determine itional specific
actions are needed.

2. Examples of situations where requiring supporting documentation is not necessary
and reasonable include, but are not limited to, when the student’s need for a specific
action under this procedure is obvious, such as when a pregnant student needs a
larger uniform or desk, needs break time, etc. Supporting documentation is also not
necessary and reasonable if a specific action is available to other students who are
not pregnant or have related conditions.

3. The Title IX Coordinator shall not require a student who is pregnant or has related
conditions to provide certification from a healthcare provider or any other person
that the student is physically able to participate in a class, program, or extracurricular
activity unless:

a. The certified level of physical ability or health is necessary for participation in the
class, program, or extracurricular activity;
b. The school unit requires such certification of all participating students; and
c. The information obtained is not used as a basis for discrimination against the
student.
Legal References: Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), 20 U.S.C. §§
1681-1688; 34 C.F.R. § 106.40.
5 MRSA § 4602 (2021); MHRC/MDOE Joint Rule Chapter 94-348 and
05-071, ch. 4.
20-A MRSA § 5001-A(4)(A) (2020).
Cross Reference: AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAA — Harassment of Students
ACAA-R2 — Student Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure
3

NEPN/NSBA Code: AC
ww Ld s wv VAP wv J wv Ai [3 wl wv
wy, cl wy, ala en . iA cA J aie @, cE ws ul 3 J s 3 3 ure J) ce z, ry
Lyi cl A we IU aye s age ws, s, Z C] S, s =a Bs, ep = cl s ii .] s
WY) Cj cI OTT, tr) = Bre ard “ cl y s we,
3 cI J if cl cl cr] 3 ere ‘4 ul Ul = a we Ye _/ We B WY =
) eae . = =a 1! s , J ahs « ™ FU =05 5
= wy, cl 3 Bssval Ss e, Lia . ra. 9, Vie
et seq; as amended
ae a v¥ vy, av - “j ere 7} U ifs o cl sims
¥Id Ul ct] a 824 iz V ry Js a ct] siwie
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 2

NEPN/NSBA Code: AC
= = wiv y ° LA * Coit cl cl cl o wren

Adepted:— May 27, 2009

Revised December 8.2010

Revised November 20-2643,

Revised: —Getober 14-2026

RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 2

NEPN,/NSBA CODE: AC
NONDISCRIMINATION/EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
RSU No. 5 does not discriminate on the basis of sex and other protected categories in its
education programs and activities, as required by federal and state laws and regulations.
RSU No. 5 prohibits discrimination, including harassment, of school employees on the basis of:
e Race including traits associated with race involving hair texture, Afro hairstyles
and protective hairstyles such as braids, twists, and locks);
e Sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics,
pregnancy or related conditions:
e Parental, family, or marital status;
e Color;
e Religion:
e Ancestry or national origin;
© Age;
e Disability; and
e Genetic information.
RSU_No. 5 prohibits discrimination, including harassment, of students on the basis of:
e Race (including traits associated with race involving hair texture, Afro hairstyles
and protective hairstyles such as braids, twists, and locks);
e Sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics,
pregnancy, or related conditions:
e Parental, family, or marital status:
e Color;
e Religion;
e Age:
e Ancestry or national origin; and
e Disability.
The Board directs the school administration to implement_a continuing program designed to
prevent discrimination against all applicants, employees, students, and other individuals having
access rights to school premises, programs, and activities.
RSU No. 5 has designated and authorized an Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator who
is responsible for ensuring compliance with all federal and state requirements prohibiting
discrimination, including sexual/sex-based harassment. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator is a person with direct access to the Superintendent.
1

The school unit has implemented complaint procedures for resolving complaints of
discrimination and harassment under this policy. The school unit provides required notices of
non-discrimination policies and complaint procedures, how they can be accessed, and the
school unit’s compliance with federal and state civil rights laws and regulations to all applicants
for employment, employees, students, parents, and other interested parties.
Legal References: _ Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-261), amending Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e to 2000e-17.
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), 20 U.S.C. §§
1681-1688, as amended by 34 C.F.R. § 106.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d to 2000d-7.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 29 U.S.C. 84 623-634.
Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6101 to 6107.
Equal Pay Act of 1963, 29 U.S.C. § 206.
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504), 29 U.S.C. §
794, as amended by 34 C.FR. § 104.7.
Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-12213, as amended by
28 C.ER. § 35.107.
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 29 U.S.C. §§ 2000ff to
2000ff-11.
Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000ge to 2000g2-6.
Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S.A. §§ 4551-4634 (2023).
Cross References: RS No. 5 Affirmative Action Plan
ACAA- Harassment of Students
ACAA-R1 — Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure
ACAA-R2 — Student Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure
ACAB — Harassment of Employees
ACAB-R1 — Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint
Procedure
ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint
Procedure
GBGB — Workplace Bullying
JICK — Bullying
JIE — Pregnant Students
2

, NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAB
action, upto-and-ineliding discharge.
As—Harassnrent
B-Sexualtthrassnrent
4-Fitle Bc Sexual Harassnrent
J aye Ss, v¥ ce B “a v¥ LJ e, we, ww, VW. war clit
s y Bare wyen we 2, Al vy = ste es was 3
ry vs v Orn Sram aia 7 A 3 o sas Case OU a
O v a % —- a arvtTadas Ttaia © Co O-
t £ ties} OF
definedinfederaltaws:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 3

NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAB
2-5 LH Under Tile ViLand Maine t
144 Pan indvidual: ; .
leGiniti ed ‘e-vielenee
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 3

NEPN/NSBA Code: ACAB
seq}
5 MRSA+4554 et seq:
MHRC Rule-Chapter-94-348-eh-3
26 MRSA $8-806-807
___ Hari Complaint Prosedite | semative-Aation
ACAD —Hazing
Adepted: ——May 27 2009
Reviewed:——December $2026
Reviewed-——November20-2043-- tune 42-2019
RSU No. 5 Schoo! Department
Page 3 of 3

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB
HARASSMENT OF EMPLOYEES
RSU No. 5 prohibits harassment of employees on the basis of:
e Race (including traits associated with race involving hair texture, Afro hairstyles
and protective hairstyles such as braids, twists, and locks);
@ Sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics,
pregnancy or related conditions;
e Parental, family, or marital status;
@ Color;
e Religion;
e Ancestry or national origin;
e Age:
e Disability; and
@ Genetic information.
Such conduct is a violation of Board policy and may constitute illegal discrimination under state
and/or federal laws.
A. Harassment
Harassment includes, but is not limited to, verbal abuse, threats, physical assault/battery, and
other unwelcome, offensive conduct based on the protected categories listed above.
Harassment that rises to the level of physical assault, battery, and/or abuse is also addressed in
Board Policy JICIA— Weapons, Violence and School Safety, and bullying conduct is also
addressed in Board Policy GBGB — Workplace Bullying. Under the Maine Civil Rights Act
violence or threats of violence against a person or their property based on their sexual
orientation is also illegal.
B. Sexual/Sex-Based Harassment
Sexual Harassment and other forms of Sex-Based Harassment are addressed under federal and
state laws/regulations. The scope and definitions of sexual/sex-based harassment under these
laws differ, as described below.
Under the federal Title IX law and its accompanying regulations, sexual/sex-based
harassment includes harassment on the basis of sex, including sexual orientation, gender
identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, pregnancy, or related conditions, that is:
ill

a. “Quid pro quo” harassment by a school employee, agent, or other person
authorized by the school unit to provide aid, benefit, or service under an
education program or activity, explicitly or impliedly conditioning the
provision of such aid, benefit, or service (such as a promotion or favorable
evaluation) on the individual’s participation in unwelcome sexual conduct.

b. “Hostile environment” harassment: Unwelcome sex-based conduct that,
based on the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively
offensive, and is so severe or pervasive that it limits or denies an individual’s
ability to participate in or benefit from the school unit’s education program
or activity (ie., creates a hostile environment). Whether a hostile
environment has been created is a fact-based inquiry that includes
consideration of a number of factors (identified in ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex
Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure).

c. Sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, and stalking, as these
terms are defined in applicable federal laws/regulations.

2. Sexual Harassment Under Maine Law
Under Maine law, sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests
for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature in the following

a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual’s employment;

b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an employee is used as the
basis for employment decisions affecting the employee; or

c. Such conduct has the purpose and effect of substantially interfering with an
employee’s work performance, or creates an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive environment.

C. Reports and Complaints of Harassment
Any employee who believes they have been harassed or sexually harassed is strongly
encouraged to make a report to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.
The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator is also available to answer questions and
provide assistance to any individual who is unsure whether harassment has occurred.
All reports and complaints of discrimination/harassment of employees shall be addressed
through ACAB-R1 — Discrimination and Harassment of Employees Complaint Procedure or
ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure.

2

Legal References: Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 9§ 12101-12213, as amended by
28 C.F.R. § 35.107.
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504), 29 U.S.C. §
794, as amended by 34 C.F.R. § 104.7.
Title 1X of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX), 20 U.S.C. §§
1681-1688, as amended by 34 C.F.R. § 106.
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d to 2000d-7.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1965, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e to 2000e-17, as
amended by 29 C.F.R. § 1604.11.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 623-634.
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, 29 U.S.C. §§ 2000ff to
2000ff-11.
Pregnant Workers Fairness Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000gg to 2000gg-6.
Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S.A. §§ 4551-4634 (2023).
MHRC Rule Chapter 94-348, ch. 3.
20-A M.R.S.A. § 1001/22) (2023).
26 M.R.S.A. §§ 806-807 (2017).

Cross Reference: ACAB-R1 — Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint
Procedure
ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint
Procedure
AC ~ Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAA — Harassment of Students
ACAA-R1 — Student Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure
ACAA-R2 — Student Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure
GBGB — Workplace Bullying
ACAD — Hazing
JICIA— Weapons, Violence and School Safety
JIE — Pregnant Students

3

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
Bigresge a5 any J BALTAY Osa, Saen J J PF OV IA Bas s ‘engie cu cL)

5 tJ we ~ vl (Jick = i} aire CJT IU Sigt Y” «til J 5 C4 ¥
shoutld-be-addressed through the Beards Student Diserimination‘Harassment and Fitle Ex Sexuat pe-addressed Lrough the beards Stiden Diserimination/Harassment andFitle ext
Any-individualwho-isumnsure-about-w ag hreris atrsure AvD0uU whether-diserimination-or- harassment has ceeurred-and/or ot disermniratterre TaTrassn7Tren tS OCCUITOCSH anw O 0
whieh-complaint procedure applies is encouraged te contact the A fiirmative Action OfieerFitle cemplaint-srecedure-apphes is encouraged te-econtaet ine + Gematrretetien OffieerHitle

Cynthia-Ad Jer, AA O/Fitle EC 4
+7 WestStreet
Freeport; ME-04032

307-865-0928
7 u, iid 0) © aid >» LA iure 0) 0) cul a 0 a Ud 0 a
oe "Legere 8, sys Lj s LJ J = ul fon Ys v¥ a > =z, ryiV ¥ 5 4a

ry wy, cl = > a = Cir ¥ Arad = ¥5 U oI cif ¥¥ 3
Fy ci ci . we, a0 ay vv 5 p> apin By CIEE ) . y ca) J aan cl & J
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 1 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
ipdaaded alla ohilit a aanets5iaate- +A bho Ale Fotolog tee peatitiac ls
J v SaEre ay ¥ a, eyen we 3 _/ TU. 8 Se on J a ¥ vy
ereatine a2T10s OC, titi Gating OF OTTe#Hns ve-etrvireniment:
A —_- 7 x o —_—— oH _— v A Aja = w= 45-049 —— 2 en _—_—T- oe ta do ~~
a5 ¥ A] Ba a . VIC ul on Ll 3, LJ J, om, 4 ul w,
g g
Submis: etd feel eid eaplieil
a Hbitissretr te sien conade SHaere etter ea price 7 oO AArpite 7a tein
ition of arrindividual
?
Dy HDPASSTOi 16-6 ereetor- or sueir conaue PA CRM PTOy Ce TS USCa as tHe
ure J TU ¥ = 3 * =4 BsLSAi 5 U
e wae &, sae “¢ wae FU =e e, TIh! C1 a, cat? y = ¥¥ ci]
A] ‘wlLeaere YYU 5B 3 ci) w, ‘. ee Buse = J se
= ™>
ae Je :
e ete a, ne 2, a &, 3s VIC VV. Cl cl s e, ¢ ream
wed Lieb} bia 4 1 leridenti
B v = J ure ¥, VU ere Ys s U ure YU =a a uJ y VU
= bed
expression
ce er Pe eee oe reed Pe Pern. © pera Co Le sey on nae 4h gandarerclatedidest
2 cI se CI] . WW = Vid yy, tio ‘’ = c cl C CI y
bd =) >
appearance, manne stirs or Ciner Benae elatec-etaracterrsties OF ait i Vrauar,
. . . 5 . 7 . 3
eeareress- OL ine Marv tas SASSTETCH SC Stor tit.
regardless of the individual’s assigned sex at birth g
is3 Peers Perret tere e- ee a en is oe Ln oe einen Lo a oe tlio er eve levees
e 3 Osis 3 “A cul ci pa 3s Liict ct) JTW Y *, wn Te y ul
errentatten, ZomMmac#r OTH AZ ant AT Stars; TC PFrOit, Ancestry; ie enarorre it,
> o >
‘eiwie eo a SU Cj a, a5 = s, s, LJ .
0 4 an an Li peers Ta aa ouaa = nat ale a te ae a Pore ee 4 aaa a,
Oe BJLUA . v¥ y TY U = BLT 3 Ul
visiters or otherswhe-have-atawful basis to make-a-complaint of diserimination
Fe. ‘~ ty: trassiien phi pate Peeaur z 1 ui
. ure eige 2 u) cI J * i ci w, > re
v¥ 3 Ul U ) ww, ww. ans cA = JIUETA aint a v .
9 Od ae ate ee al haracema pit > coho alemalescee adst.8e-F
a. JUTS P SMULELS ore ‘etge cry a JU Ivy o e, = Ss, = O
schooLaid- benefit or- service (such-as-a promotion ot favorable evaluation)
oranindiiduals partietpatten ian werceme Sexe eonauet:
Pe 3, v JL ore OU * » WS VV w, a aU wie wa V
SC Hata reasonapre Ppersor wotre-aerer mitre SSO-SEVETC, PCIVasive aitd
ebycetrrery ortensive tha offootivel: denies ait ier ytrauar SCquar access
= CO WU. IU (4 3 Bg WS te ct] clikwt ci ‘4 3 Vv
o- Sexval-asseult, dating vielenee, demestie-vielence and stalking as these Secratessatt dating -vterenee, Gomes e-vielence-and Stancie-as these
terms-are-defined in federaltaws.
6D apt? oo: ner 3 ee s¢1 a aes at 9 ey at Paes Peeees Dee _—e Pn eee ee
. ue 7 = aM Care w, Al y Al VIuuds oy on 4 ue 3s
> 2
sexual harassment invelving-an- employee whether the indivi dualisthe alleged
¥ J JL, - ue UJ 8, oie e, 7) * V 3, a,
IU = a fia wy —. fom Cl ul J oy i SA¥, = C4 eo
se
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 2 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
stese a Tera Complaint 8 fled
rs 0) cal O OTs WIT 5 a Sed ¥ CO ta aid ah
<1 e , ¥ Ul wy .) wai au uJ] ve UT) Cl 5 mVat7,
. SALUAT e i) eeig oe J esa8 CTUr 3 BsLeAY cr) 73 aiyp C1]
‘eime 3 oe S we wre = cil y 4 ws, Fy Cj Cl J are CTI A]
measures, up-to-andinehiding discharge:
OLS 8 re baw ome a ww TU. J BsAresR ry7i VV WAU ry VY ¥ 3 iv ¥ ul
enge eS, a ¥ ct] Ca) cll ae 4 ey a Ss, 3 cy Ju oe. re c) 3
aU a, Y é VJ LJ z, . 1S, J J e, 1] 3s 2, vy, a WJ Of we, 2,
Civil Rights -4-S-Department of Education, 5 Pest Office Square; 8" Floor, Boston,
4 1 B= Py ar Pa oy, ure 3 LU CJ 2, 5 s ww, Speres 5 O 5 5
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 3 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
B-C laint Handi HW cg
reeeired,

Lj . . 4 | - ~
f * } « -. ry - ~

“4 icabl | federal-lawes-
allewed: "

RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 4 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
Coordinator: .
Cindi 1Sut Loti
‘ . . . 4 5 4; - ”
. - . s ean = a oe ; “6 3 ~ cl aS . 3 Al TT, = Vat,
privaeytaws}-
D-Appeats
cenifieantiei
. > 7)
6. : . . . re 4 j « .
E-Reeeords
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 5 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
Section 3—Fitle IX-S Hi Complaint P i
AHew-teMake+-Repert
eireunistanees-
| . } 4 44 + : ?

Department of Education, 5 Post-Offiee Square 8" Fleer, Boston MA 02409-3024

(telephore:-617-289-0HD-

sexual harassment:
B-—Hew-te-Make « Format Complaint

RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 6 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
States:
Admini wet
"
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 7 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
p—_Neti Parties ofF 1 lai
— ¢ g j
44 . i ° + 4
E—infernral Resolution Proeess
respendentis-an employee:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 8 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
1 . . aa : ~ ~
5 The; . oH.
. . . . . . .
ye ‘s © Ci we, >
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 9 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
. 4 . . . - ~
)
Cp ation ef bits

repert-and-party responses. :

as a ws, 1 a pre aac: = yu e, cl]
} . 4 £ io . | :
fellewing:

y wv Oy Fa ‘a *e WY > v > OW s CI Oe
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 10 of 13

: NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
, } h 4 . . -
HER lies; Diseipl 1 Other-Acti
4+-_Remedies
. } Cc j . - - ~
2 Diseipli + Other-Acti
olationsinvelyi 4 ,
—Probatien:
o—Demetion
o—Diseharge-
«Performance improvement plan
— Counseling:
i © eadershin/stinend position:
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 11 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
k—Appeats
J CI a J S, : Cl S, LJ i ry C/ 7s a f=, U ch J 5 a ria cl
— ANI = we es, y J wl oa J = ‘3 we, BZ ‘* VY cl VJ 5 ¥, =
OT gTeTa © ©) i Wr : . OT To 7a Cj ay O Cl vy xd Ot
4 « 14 * Us}: ; - -
dReeerds
xe 5 : | waulere 0 1 Cr oO were ri ° “Ss
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 12 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R
Adepted-——May 272009
RSU No. 5 School Department
Page 13 of 13

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R1i
EMPLOYEE DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
The RSU No. 5 Board has adopted this employee procedure in order to provide prompt and
equitable resolution of complaints of unlawful discrimination and harassment based on race:
color; religion: ancestry or national origin: age; disability; and genetic information. Complaints
of sex discrimination, including sexual/sex-based harassment, are addressed in ACAB-R2 —
Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure. In cases where allegations
include sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment and one or more other protected
categories, ACAB-R2 will be used.
Complaints alleging unlawful discrimination and harassment of an employee are addressed
under ACAB-R1 - Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure or ACAB-R2 —
Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint Procedure.
Any individual who is unsure about whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred, and/or which complaint procedure applies, is encouraged to contact the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.
AAO/TITLE 1X COORDINATORS’ INFORMATION:
Cynthia Alexander, Charlie Mellon,
Assistant Superintendent Assistant Principal, F.
17 West Street 30 Holbrook Rd.
Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
207-865-0928 207-865-4706
alexanderc@rsu5.orq mellonc@rsu5.org
Section 1. Definitions
For purposes of this complaint procedure, the following definitions will be used.

A. “Discrimination or harassment”: Discrimination or harassment on the basis of an
individual’s membership in a protected category.

B. “Discrimination”: Treating individuals differently, or interfering with or preventing them
from enjoying the advantages or privileges afforded to others because of their
membership in a protected category.

C. “Harassment”: Oral, written, graphic, electronic, or physical conduct relating to an
individual's actual or perceived membership in a protected category that is. sufficiently
severe or pervasive so as to interfere with or limit that individual’s ability to participate

1

in the school unit’s education program or activities by creating a hostile, intimidating, or
offensive environment.

D. “Complaint” is defined as an allegation that an employee has been discriminated against
or harassed on the basis of race, color, religion, ancestry. national origin, age, disability,
or genetic information.

Section 2. Complaint Procedure

This procedure should be used to address any report or complaint of unlawful discrimination or
harassment based on a protected category which does not involve sex discrimination or
sexual/sex-based harassment.

A. How to Make a Complaint

1. An employee who believes they have been unlawfully discriminated against or

harassed is encouraged to try to resolve the problem by informing the individualls)
that the behavior is unwelcome or offensive and requesting that the behavior stop.
This will not prevent the employee from making an immediate complaint to the
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

2. Any employee who believes they have been harassed or discriminated against should
report their concern prom ptly to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator.

3, The individual making the report must provide basic information concerning the
allegation of discrimination or harassment (i.e., date, time, location individuals
involved, nature of the allegation(s}} to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator. {f the report is made orally, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator will document it.

4. lf the individual is unsure as to whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred or needs assistance in preparing a complaint, they are encouraged to
discuss the matter with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

5. Individuals will not be retaliated against for reporting suspected discrimination or
harassment or for participating in an investigation. Retaliation is illegal under federal
and state nondiscrimination laws and any retaliation will result in disciplinary action
up to and including termination.

6. Employees are encouraged to utilize the school unit’s complaint procedure.
However, employees are hereby notified that they also have the right to report
incidents of discrimination or harassment to:

2

e Maine Human Rights Commission, 51 State House Station, Augusta, Maine
04333: telephone: 207-624-6290; website: httos:///www.mbre.gov/mbhre/;
and/or

e Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education, 5 Post Office Square. gh
Floor, Boston, MA 02109-3921 (telephone: 617-289-0111; website:
https://ocrcas.ed.gov/contact-ocr?field state_value=688.

B. Complaint Handling and Investigation

1. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will promptly inform the
Superintendent and the person who is the subject of the complaint (respondent)
that a complaint has been received.

a. \f the allegations include sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment,
ACAB-R2 will be followed instead of this procedure.

2. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may pursue an informal resolution
of the complaint with the agreement of the parties involved. Any party to the
complaint may decide to end the informal resolution process and pursue the formal
process at any point. Any informal resolution is subject to the approval of the parties
and the Superintendent, who shall consider whether the resolution is in the best
interest of the school unit and the parties in light of the particular circumstances and
applicable policies and laws.

3. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may implement supportive
measures for an employee to reduce the risk of further discrimination or harassment
of the employee while an investigation is pending. Examples of supportive measures
include, but are not limited to, ordering no contact between the individuals,
temporarily moving work locations or changing schedules, etc.

4. The complaint will be investigated by a trained internal or external individual
designated by the Superintendent and the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator. Any complaint about an employee who holds a supervisory position
shall be investigated by a person who is not subject to that supervisor’s authority.

5. Any complaint about the Superintendent should be submitted to the Board Chair.
who should consult with legal counsel concerning the handling and investigation of
the complaint.

6. The investigator shall consult with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator
as appropriate during the investigation process.

7. The respondent will be provided with an opportunity to be heard as part of the
investigation.

3

8. The complainant and the respondent may suggest witnesses to be interviewed
and/or submit materials they believe are relevant to the complaint.

9. Ifthe complaint is against an employee of the school unit, any rights conferred under
an applicable collective bargaining agreement will be applied.

10. Privacy rights of all parties to the complaint shall be maintained in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws:

11. The investigation will be completed within forty (40) school days of receiving the
complaint, if practicable.

12. The investigator will provide a written report and findings to the Affirmative Action

Officer/'Title 1X Coordinator.
C. Findings and Subsequent Actions

1. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall consult with the
Superintendent concerning the investigation and findings.

2. If there is a finding that discrimination or harassment occurred, the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator. in consultation with the Superintendent shall:

a. Determine what remedial action(s), if any, are required to end the
discrimination or harassment, remedy its effects. and prevent recurrence;
and

b. Determine what disciplinary action(s) should be taken against the
individual(s) who engaged in discrimination or harassment, if any.

3. Inform the complainant and the respondent in writing of the results of the
investigation and its resolution (in accordance with applicable state and federal
privacy laws).

D. Appeals

1. After the conclusion of the investigation, the complainant or respondent may seek
an appeal of the findings solely on the basis of either:

a. Prejudicial procedural error; or

b. The discovery of previously unavailable relevant evidence that could
significantly impact the outcome.
4

2. Appeals must be submitted in writing to the Superintendent within five (5) school
days after receiving notice of the resolution.

3. Upon receipt of a valid appeal, the Superintendent shall provide notice to the other
party, along with an opportunity to provide a written statement within five (5) school
days.

4. The Superintendent shall review the available documentation and may conduct
further investigation if deemed appropriate.

5. The Superintendent’s decision on the appeal will be provided to the parties within
ten (10) school days, if practicable. The Superintendent’s decision is final.

E. Records
The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will keep a written record of the complaint
process and actions taken.
Cross References: AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAB — Harassment of Employees
ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint
Procedure
JIE - Pregnant Employees
5

NEPN/NSBA CODE: ACAB-R2
EMPLOYEE SEX DISCRIMINATION/HARASSMENT COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
The RSU No. 5 Board has adopted this employee procedure in order to provide prompt and
equitable resolution of reports and complaints of unlawful sex discrimination, including
allegations of sexual harassment and other forms of sex-based harassment, as described in
Policies AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action and ACAB —
Harassment of Employees.
Although the specific provisions under Title IX and Maine law differ somewhat in regard to sex
discrimination and sexual/sex-based harassment, the Board has chosen to address all such
complaints under this procedure, which meets all Title IX and Maine law requirements.
Complaints alleging unlawful discrimination or harassment of an employee (or other non-
student or non-employee victim) on the basis of other protected categories (race; color:
religion; ancestry or national origin; age; disability; and genetic information) are addressed
under ACAB-R1 — Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure.
Complaints alleging unlawful discrimination and harassment of an employee are addressed
under ACAB-R1 - Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint Procedure or ACAB-R2 —
Employee Sex Discrimination and Sexual/Sex-Based Harassment Complaint Procedure.
Any individual who is unsure about whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred and/or which complaint procedure applies is encouraged to contact the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.
AAO/TITLE IX COORDINATORS’ INFORMATION:
Cynthia Alexander, Charlie Melion,
Assistant Superintendent Assistant Principal, FHS
17 West Street 30 Holbrook Ra.
Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
207-865-0928 207-865-4706
alexanderc(@rsu5.org mellonc@rsu5.org
INFORMATION FOR ONE CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE PER SCHOOL:
Lexi Triggiani, DCS Kelley Ryder-Herzog, MSS Susan Albertini, MLS
School Counselor School Counselor School Counselor
654 Hallowell Rd. 21 Morse St. 20 Mollyhauk Lane
Durham, ME 04222 Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032
1

207-353-9333 207-865-6361 207-865-4561
triggianil@rsu5.org herzoqk@rsu5.org albertinis@rsu5.org
Phyllis Latham, FMS Rachel Lira, FHS Cathryn Bigley, PES

School Counselor Social Worker School Counselor
19 Kendall Lane 30 Holbrook Rd. 587 Elmwood Rd.
Freeport, ME 04032 Freeport, ME 04032 Pownal, ME 04069

207-865-6051 207-865-4706 207-688-4832

lathamp@rsu5.orq lirar@rsu5.org bigleyc@rsu5.org
Section 1. Definitions
For purposes of this complaint procedure, the following definitions will be used.

A. “Complainant” means: (1) the employee victim of alleged sex discrimination (including
sexual/sex-based harassment); or (2) other victim of alleged sex discrimination
(including sexual/sex-based harassment) who was participating or attempting to
participate in the school unit’s education programs or activities at the time of the alleged
sex discrimination.

B. “Complaint” under the Title IX regulations: An oral or written request to the [school unit
to investigate and make a determination about alleged discrimination under Title IX.” An
oral request for investigation should be documented by the Affirmative Action
Officer /Title IX Coordinator.

C. “Confidential employee” means: (1) an employee of the school unit whose
communications are privileged or confidential under federal or state law. The
employee's confidential status, for purposes of Title IX, is only with respect to
information received while the employee is functioning within the scope of their duties
to which privilege or confidentiality applies; or (2) an employee of the school unit
designated as confidential for the purpose of providing services to persons related to sex
discrimination (in which case the employee’s confidential status applies only to
information received about sex discrimination in connection with providing those
services}.

D. “Discrimination”: Treating individuals differently, or interfering with or preventing them
from enjoying the advantages or privileges afforded to others because of their
membership in a protected category.

2

E. “Gender identity”: The gender-related identity, appearance, mannerisms or other
gender-related characteristics of an individual, regardless of the individual’s assigned sex
at birth.”

F. “Parental status”: The status of a person who, with respect to another person who is
under the age of 18 or who is 18 or older but is incapable of self-care because of a
physical or mental disability, is: (1) a biological parent; (2) an adoptive parent; (3) a
foster parent; (4) a stepparent; (5) a legal custodian or guardian; (6) in loco parentis with
respect to such a person: or (7) actively seeking legal custody, guardianship, visitation, or
adoption of such a person.”

G. “Party”: A complainant or respondent.

H. “Pregnancy and related conditions” includes “(1) Pregnancy, childbirth, termination of
pregnancy, or lactation; (2) Medical conditions related to pregnancy, childbirth,
termination of pregnancy, or lactation: or (3) Recovery from pregnancy, childbirth
termination of pregnancy, lactation, or related medical conditions.”

|. “Respondent”: A person who is alleged to have violated the school unit’s prohibition on
sex discrimination.

J. “Retaliation” under Title IX: Intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against any
person by the school unit, an employee, or other person authorized by the recipient to
provide aid. benefit, or services under the [school unit’s| education program or activity
for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by Title IX/rezulations,
or because the person has reported information, made a complaint, testified, assisted,
or participating or refused to participate in any manner in an investigation, proceeding,
or other action taken by a school unit in regard to allegations of sex discrimination.”

K. “Sex-based harassment” under Title IX: Harassment on the basis of sex, including sexual
orientation, gender identity, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, pregnancy, or related
conditions, that meets one of the following:

a. “Quid pro quo” harassment by a school employee, agent, or other person authorized
by the school unit to provide aid, benefit, or service under an education program or
activity, explicitly or impliedly conditioning the provision of such aid, benefit, or
service on the individual’s participation in unwelcome sexual conduct.

b. “Hostile environment” harassment: Unwelcome sex-based conduct that, based on
the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively offensive, and is so
severe or pervasive that it limits or denies an individual’s ability to participate in or
benefit from the school unit’s education program or activity [i.e., creates a hostile
environment}. A school unit is obligated to address a sex-based hostile environment
under its education program or activity, even when some conduct alleged to be

3

contributing to the hostile environment occurred outside the recipient's education
program or activity. Whether a hostile environment has been created is a fact-based
inquiry that includes consideration of a number of factors.

i. Factors to consider in regard to the creation of a “hostile environment”: “{i)
the degree to which the conduct affected the complainant’s ability to access
the [school unit’s] education program or activity; (ii) the type, frequency, and
duration of the conduct; (iii) the parties’ ages, roles within the [school unit’s]
education program or activity, previous interactions, and other factors about
each party that may be relevant to evaluating the effects of the conduct: (iv)
the location of the conduct and the context in which the conduct occurred;
and (v) other sex-based harassment in the school unit’s education program or
activity.”

c. Sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, and stalking, as these terms are
defined below.

i. “Sexual assault” is an offense classified as a forcible or nonforcible sex
offense under the uniform reporting system of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Such offenses include but are not limited to, rape, sodomy,
sexual assault with an object, and fondling.

ii. “Dating violence” is violence committed by a person: (a) who is or has been
in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the victim: (b)
where the existence of such a relationship shall be determined based ona
consideration of the following factors: (1) the length of the relationship, (2)
the type of relationship: and (3) the frequency of interaction between the
persons involved in the relationship.”

iii. “Domestic violence” is defined in the Title IX regulations as “Felony or
misdemeanor crimes committed by a person who: (a) is a current or former
spouse or intimate partner of the victim under the family or domestic
violence laws of the jurisdiction of the recipient, or a person similarly
situation to a spouse of the victim: (b} is cohabitating, or has cohabitated
with the victim as a spouse or intimate partner: (c) shares a child in common
with the victim: or (d) commits acts against a youth or adult who is protected
from those acts under the family or domestic violence laws of the
jurisdiction.”

iv. “Stalking”: Engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person that
would cause a reasonable person to: (a) fear for the person's safety or the
safety of others; or (b) suffer substantial emotional distress.”

L. “Sexual harassment” under Maine law: Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual
favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature in the following
situations:

4

a. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an employee’s educational benefits;

b. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an employee is used as the
basis for decisions on educational benefits: or

c. Such conduct has the purpose and effect of substantially interfering with an
employee’s academic performance or creates an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive environment.

M. “Sexual orientation”: Under Maine law: A person’s “actual or perceived heterosexuality,
bisexuality, homosexuality, or gender identity or expression.” Sexual orientation is also
covered by Title Ix.

Section 2. Complaint Procedure
This procedure should be used to address any report or complaint of sex discrimination or
sexual/sex-based harassment of an employee.

A. Reports of Alleged Sex Discrimination or Sexual/Sex-Based Harassment
1. Any school unit employee (except for designated confidential employees) who

receives a report or has reason to believe that an employee may have been
discriminated against or harassed on the basis of sex is required to make a report to
the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

2. Confidential employees who receive a report that an employee may have
experienced sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment must inform the
person making the report that the employee is designated “confidential” and inform
them of the circumstances in which the employee is not required to make a report to
the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator. The confidential employee will
provide the reporter with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator’s
contact information and explain that the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator may be able to offer and coordinate supportive measures. initiate an
informal resolution process, or initiate an investigation under this complaint
procedure.

3. Employees who believe that they have been discriminated against or harassed on
the basis of sex should report their concern promptly to the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator. The report will be documented by the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

4. The individual making the report should provide basic, available information orally or
in writing concerning the allegation [i.e., individuals involved, date, time, location

5

and type of allegation}. If the information is conveyed orally, the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator will document it.

5. lfan individual is unsure as to whether unlawful discrimination or harassment has
occurred, they are encouraged to discuss the matter with the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator.

6. individuals will not be retaliated against for reporting suspected discrimination or
harassment or for participating in an investigation. Retaliation is illegal under
federal/state nondiscrimination laws and Board policies, and any retaliation will
result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination.

7. The Superintendent will be promptly notified of all reports of alleged discrimination
or harassment of an employee.

8. An employee who believes they have been discriminated against or harassed on the
basis of sex is encouraged to utilize this complaint procedure. However, employees
are hereby notified that they also have the right to report incidents of discrimination
or harassment to:

e Maine Human Rights Commission, 51 State House Station, Augusta, Maine
04333; telephone: 207-624-6290; website: https://www.maine.gov/mhrc/'}:
and/or
e Office for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education, 5 Post Office Square, 8%
Floor, Boston, MA 02109-3921 (telephone: 617-289-0111; website:
https://ocrcas.ed.gov/contact-ocr?field_state_value=688).
B. Processing of Complaints

1. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will treat complainants and
respondents equitably through the complaint procedure.

2. Ifthe individual making the report is the alleged victim, or if the alleged victim is
identified by the individual making the report, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator will meet with the alleged victim to discuss the allegations and
supportive measures that may be appropriate in the particular circumstances and to
explain the complaint procedure.

If the alleged victim is unknown ta the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator,
the person who made the report will be notified of the availability of the complaint
procedure.

3. Supportive Measures

6

a. Supportive measures are individualized measures designed to ensure the
employee can continue to access and perform their work (including but not
limited to: requiring no contact between individuals, temporarily moving
work locations, and changing schedules).

b. Supportive measures must not unreasonably burden either party and must
be designed to protect the safety of the parties or the school unit's
educational environment or to provide support during the complaint
procedure or an informal resolution process. The school unit may not impose
such measures for punitive or disciplinary reasons.

c. Supportive measures may be continued even if a complaint or informal
resolution process is not initiated, or after the conclusion of such processes, if
appropriate under the circumstances.

d. Complainants and respondents must be provided with a timely opportunity
to seek, from an appropriate and impartial employee, modification or
reversal of a decision to provide, deny, modify, or terminate supportive
measures applicable to them. This employee must not be the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator and must have the authority to modify or
reverse the decision.

e. Complainants and respondents also have the opportunity to seek additional
modification or termination of a supportive measure applicable to them if
circumstances change,

f. The school unit will not disclose information about supportive measures to
persons other than the person to whom they apply unless it is necessary to
provide a supportive measure or to restore or preserve a party’s access to
education programs and activities.

4. ‘f the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator reasonably determines that the
conduct alleged does not involve illegal discrimination or harassment, the school unit
is not obligated to initiate the complaint process and may dismiss the complaint (See
Subsection C.1. below). If the alleged conduct potentially violates other laws, Board
policies/ procedures, or professional expectations (in the case of employees), the
matter may be referred to the Superintendent and/or other appropriate
administrator(s) to address as deemed appropriate.

5. In response to a complaint alleging prohibited sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based
harassment, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will initiate the
complaint process or the informal resolution process (if available and appropriate)
according to this procedure. When feasible, the decision to initiate an investigation
or informal resolution process or dismiss the complaint will be made within ten (10)
school days of receipt of the complaint.

6. Incertain circumstances, the Affirmative Action Officer/'Title IX Coordinator may
initiate the investigation process, even when the alleged victim chooses not to, after
any or all allegations are withdrawn by the alleged victim, or when an informal

7

resolution process is not initiated or is terminated. To make this fact-specific
determination, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator will consider, ata
minimum:

a. The complainant’s request not to proceed with initiating a complaint;

b. The complainant’s reasonable safety concerns regarding initiating a
complaint;

c. The risk that additional acts of discrimination or harassment would occur if a
complaint is not initiated:

d. The severity of the alleged discrimination or harassment, including whether
the discrimination, if established, would require the removal of a respondent
from school or imposition of another disciplinary sanction to end the
discrimination or harassment and prevent its recurrence:

e. The age and relationship of the parties, including whether the respondent is
an employee of the school unit;

f. The scope of the alleged discrimination or harassment, including information
suggesting a pattern, ongoing discrimination/harassment, or
discrimination/harassment alleged to have impacted multiple individuals;

g. The availability of evidence to assist a decisionmaker in determining whether
discrimination or harassment occurred; and

h. Whether the school unit could end the alleged discrimination or harassment
and prevent its recurrence without initiating the complaint procedure.

If, after considering these and any other factors that may be relevant, the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator determines that the alleged conduct presents an
imminent and serious threat to the health or safety of the complainant or other
individuals, or that the alleged conduct prevents the school unit from ensuring equal
access to its education programs and activities, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator may initiate a complaint.

7. Ifthe Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator initiates a complaint, the
complainant will receive prior notice, and any reasonable safety concerns will be
addressed.

8. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title [IX Coordinator will confirm the initiation of an
investigation or informal resolution process in writing to both parties. The
communication will include: a} a copy of the complaint procedure; b) sufficient
information available at the time to allow the parties to respond to the allegations
including the identities of the parties involved, the conduct alleged to constitute sex
discrimination or sexual/sex-based harassment, and the date(s} and location(s) of the
alleged incident(s); c) notice that retaliation is prohibited; and d) notice that the
parties are entitled to an equal opportunity to access the relevant and not otherwise
impermissible evidence.

8

9. Regardless of whether an investigation is initiated, the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator will take appropriate, prompt, and effective steps to
ensure that discrimination or harassment does not continue or recur. The
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will also coordinate supportive
measures, as appropriate.

10. If the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator decides to investigate additional
allegations of discrimination or harassment made by the complainant against the
respondent after the parties received notice of the complaint, the Affirmative Action
Officer /Title IX Coordinator will notify the parties of the additional allegations in
writing.

11. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may consolidate complaints of
discrimination or harassment against more than one respondent, or by more than
one complainant against one or more respondents, or by one party against another
party, when the allegations arise out of the same facts or circumstances.

12. The school unit will presume that the respondent is not responsible for alleged
discrimination or harassment until a determination is made at the conclusion of the
investigation.

13. The school unit will take reasonable steps to protect the privacy of the parties and
witnesses during the complaint procedure and will comply with applicable state and
federal privacy laws. These steps will not restrict the ability of the parties to obtain
and present evidence, including by speaking to witnesses; confidential
employees/resources: or otherwise prepare for and participate in the complaint
procedure.

C. Dismissal of Complaints

1. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may dismiss a complaint in the
following circumstances:

a. The school unit is unable to identify a respondent after taking reasonable
steps to do so;

b. The respondent is not participating in the school unit’s education programs
and activities, or is not employed by the school unit;

c. The complainant voluntarily withdraws any or all allegations in the complaint,
the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator declines to initiate a
complaint and determines that, without the complainant’s withdrawn
allegations, the alleged conduct remaining, if any, would not constitute
discrimination or harassment even if proven; or

9

d. The Affirmative Action Officer/Titie 1X Coordinator determines that the
conduct alleged in the complaint, even if proven, would not constitute
discrimination or harassment under state/federal laws and regulations.

2. Upon dismissal, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will promptly
notify the complainant (and the respondent, if they had received notice of the
complaint allegations} of the basis for the dismissal, and provide the opportunity to
appeal the dismissal.

3. Dismissals may be appealed on the following bases:

a. Procedural irregularity that would change the outcome;

b. New evidence that would change the outcome and that was not reasonably
available when the dismissal [or determination in the case] was made; and

c. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator, investigator, or
decisionmaker had a conflict or bias for or against complainants or
respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent that
would change the outcome.

4. An appeal of a complaint dismissal must be made in writing to the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator within five (5) school days and state the basis for the
appeal.

5. Ifthe dismissal is appealed, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall:

a. Notify the respondent of the appeal if they had received notice of the
complaint allegations:

b. Implement the appeal procedure equally for the parties;

c. Ensure that the trained decisionmaker for the appeal did not take part in an
investigation of the allegations or dismissal of the complaint:

d. Provide the parties a reasonable and equal opportunity to make a statement
in support of, or challenging, the outcome; and

e. Notify the parties in writing of the result of the appeal and the rationale for it
within five (5) school days, if feasible.

6. When a complaint is dismissed, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator
will, at a minimum:

a. Offer supportive measures to the complainant and respondent if appropriate;
and

b. Take other prompt and effective steps, as appropriate, to ensure that
discrimination or harassment does not continue or recur within the school
unit’s program or activity.

10

7. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will document actions taken
during the appeal process.

D. Administrative Leave

1. The Superintendent may place an employee respondent on administrative leave
during the complaint procedure in accordance with any applicable state laws, school
policies, and collective bargaining unit provisions.

2. Any decision to place an employee respondent on administrative leave shall be made
in compliance with any applicable disability laws, including Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

3. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will document actions taken
during the administrative leave process.

[Note: The Superintendent may remove a student from education programs and

activities on an emergency basis during the complaint procedure in accordance with the

procedures set forth in ACAA-R2, Section 2.D]

E. Informal Resolution Process

1. Informal resolution is not permitted in cases where a student is the complainant and
an employee is the respondent to alleged sex discrimination or harassment [such
cases should be addressed under Procedure ACAA-R2].

2. The Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator may, if appropriate, offer the parties the
opportunity to resolve the complaint through an informal resolution process at any
point prior to an investigation or determination of responsibility. Engaging in an
informal resolution process is voluntary on the part of each party. The Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator also may decline to pursue an informal resolution
despite a party’s request (for example, if the alleged conduct presents a future risk of
harm to the complainant or others).

3. Both (or all) parties must voluntarily agree in writing to participate in an informal
resolution process, and a party may withdraw from the process at any time. The
parties will not be required to attend meetings together unless they voluntarily agree
to do so.

4. Before initiating an informal resolution process, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title
IX Coordinator will ensure that the parties receive notice of: i.) the allegations; ii.)
the requirements of the informal resolution process; ii.) the rizht of any party to
withdraw from the process and initiate or resume the investigation process: iv.) that
the parties’ agreement to an informal resolution would preclude them from initiating

11

or resuming the investigation; v.} potential terms that may be requested or offered in
an informal resolution agreement, including notice that an agreement is binding on
the parties: and vi.) what information the school unit will maintain regarding the
informal resolution process.

[Note: Informal resolutions can take many forms, depending on the particular case,
including but not limited to: restrictions on contact between the parties; facilitated
discussions between the parties; restorative justice; acknowledgment of
responsibility by a respondent; apologies; disciplinary actions against a respondent
or requirements to engage in specific services; or supportive measures.

5. The facilitator for the informal resolution process must be trained, cannot be the
same person as the investigator or decisionmaker in the matter, and must not have a
conflict of interest or bias regarding parties to such matters generally or to an
individual complainant or respondent.

6. The Superintendent must agree to the terms of any informal resolution reached
between the parties, considering whether the resolution is in the best interest of the
parties and the school unit in light of the particular circumstances, applicable
laws/regulations, and Board policies.

7. Ifan informal resolution agreement is reached, it will be agreed to in writing by both
parties and the Affirmative Action Office/Title 1X Coordinator. Any such agreement is
final and binding on the parties.

F. Investigation Process

1. The complaint will be investigated by a trained internal or external individual
designated by the Superintendent and the Affirmative Action Officer/Title Ix
Coordinator. The investigator shall not have a conflict of interest or bias against
complainants or respondents generally, or an individual complainant or respondent,
and will consult with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator during the
investigation process.

2. Any complaint about an employee who holds a supervisory position will be
investigated by a person not subject to that supervisor’s authority. Any complaint
about the Superintendent will be submitted to the Board Chair, who will consult with
legal counsel concerning the handling and investigation of the complaint.

3. Ifthe complaint is against an employee of the school unit, any rights conferred under
an applicable bargaining agreement will be applied to the extent they do not conflict
with the requirements of Title IX and accompanying regulations.

12

4. The burden is on the school unit, and not the parties, to gather sufficient evidence
(through the investigation) in order to determine whether illegal discrimination or
harassment occurred.

5. The investigator shall provide an opportunity for the complainant and respondent to
be heard as part of the investigation. The parties will not be required to attend
meetings together.

6. The parties may suggest witnesses to be interviewed and/or submit materials that
they believe are relevant to the allegations and complaint.

7. The investigator will evaluate evidence that is relevant and not otherwise
impermissible, including both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence. Credibility
determinations will not be based on a person’s status as a complainant, respondent,
or witness.

a. The Title IX regulations define “relevant” as “related to the allegations of sex
discrimination under investigation. Questions are relevant when they seek
evidence that may aid in showing whether the alleged sex discrimination
occurred, and evidence is relevant when it may aid a decisionmaker in
determining whether the alleged sex discrimination occurred.”

8. The following types of evidence, and questions seeking that evidence, are
impermissible:

a. Evidence that is protected under a privilege recognized by federal or
state law, or evidence provided to a confidential employee, unless the person
to whom the privilege or confidentiality is owed has voluntarily waived the
privilege or confidentiality in writing.

b. A party’s or witness’s records that are made or maintained by a physician,
psychologist, or other recognized professional or paraprofessional in
connection with the treatment to the party or witness, unless the school unit
obtains that party’s or witness’s voluntary, written consent for use in the
complaint procedure; and

a. Evidence that relates to the complainant’s sexual interests or prior sexual
conduct, unless evidence about the complainant’s prior sexual conduct is
offered to prove that someone other than the respondent committed alleged
sexual/sex-based harassment or is evidence about specific incidents of the
complainant’s prior sexual conduct with the respondent that is offered to
prove consent to the alleged sexual/sex-based harassment. The fact of prior
sexual conduct between the complainant and respondent does not by itself
demonstrate or imply the complainant’s consent to the alleged sex-based
harassment or preclude a determination that sex-based harassment
occurred.

13

9. The investigator will provide each party with the opportunity to review the evidence
that is relevant to the allegations of discrimination or harassment (and not otherwise
impermissible), and to respond to it.

10. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator and investigator will take
reasonable steps to prevent and address the parties’ unauthorized disclosure of
information and evidence obtained solely through the complaint procedure.
Disclosure of such information and evidence for the purposes of administering
administrative proceedings or litigation related to the complaint are authorized,

11. The investigator will conclude the investigation and issue a written report to the
Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator within forty (40) school days, if
feasible.

a. Ifthe investigator has been charged with making a determination of
responsibility//non-responsibility with respect to each allegation, such
determination(s) and the reasons, therefore, shall be included in the report.

12. Extensions of time may be granted to complete the investigation if approved by the
Affirmative Action Officer/Title 1X Coordinator for reasonable cause. Notice of any
extension and the reasons, therefore, will be provided to the parties.

G. Determinations of Responsibility

1. The standard used to determine whether illeza! discrimination or harassment
occurred is the preponderance of the evidence standard (“more likely than not”).

2. The decisionmaker will review the investigation report, the evidence gathered (as
appropriate}, and will have the discretion to conduct additional interviews of parties
and/or witnesses if needed to assess credibility,

3. The decisionmaker will make a written determination of
responsibility/non-responsibility in regard to each allegation and the reasons, which
shall be shared with the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator and the
parties.

4. In general, the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator will notify the parties
of the determination decision(s) within five (5) school days of the determination
being reached. Reasonable extensions of time may be approved by the Affirmative
Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator for good reason. The notification will include the
permissible bases for appeal and the deadline for receipt of appeals.

14

5. Ifthere is a determination that the respondent is responsible for violations, the
appropriate administrator will make decisions as to appropriate disciplinary action
and remedies.

6. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall, as appropriate:

a. Coordinate the provision and implementation of remedies to a complainant
and any other persons if necessary to provide equal access to the school
unit’s educational programs and activities that had been limited or denied by
discrimination or harassment:

b. Coordinate the imposition of any disciplinary sanctions on a respondent
including notification to the complainant of any such disciplinary sanctions;
and

c. Take other appropriate prompt and effective steps if necessary to ensure
discrimination and harassment does not continue or recur.

7. Adetermination of responsibility becomes final on the date that the Affirmative Action
Officer/Title 1X Coordinator provides the parties with the written determination of the
results of the appeal if an appeal is filed. If an appeal is not filed, the determination of
responsibility becomes final on the date on which the appeal would no longer be
considered timely.

8. The school unit will not discipline a party, witness, or others participating in the
complaint procedure for making a false statement or for engaging in consensual sexual
conduct based solely on the determination that sex discrimination or sexual/sex-based
harassment occurred.

H. Remedies, Discipline, and Other Actions
1. Remedies

Remedies are measures used to ensure that the complainant has equal access to the school
unit’s education programs and activities following the decisionmaker’s determination(s). Such
remedies may include supportive measures and may include other appropriate measures,
depending on the determination(s) and the needs of the complainant. The Affirmative Action
Officer/Title IX Coordinator is responsible for implementing remedies and providing any needed
assistance to the complainant.

2. Discipline and Other Actions

Examples of disciplinary and other actions that may be imposed on a student when there is a
determination that they are responsible for one or more violations of sexual/sex-based
harassment include suspension, expulsion, restorative justice, required education or counseling,
and other measures.

15

Examples of disciplinary actions that may be imposed on an employee when there is a
determination that they are responsible for one or more violations of sexual/sex-based
harassment include: written warning, probation, counseling, demotion, suspension without pay
termination.

|. Appeals

1. After the conclusion of the investigation and decisionmaker determination(s), the
complainant or respondent may seek an appeal of the findings based on the
following factors:

a. Procedural irregularity that would chanze the outcome;

b. New evidence that would change the outcome and that was not reasonably
available when the determination was made; and

c. The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator, investigator, or
decisionmaker had a conflict or bias for or against complainants or
respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent that
would change the outcome.

2. The appeal must be made in writing to the Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX
Coordinator within five (5) school days and state the basis for the appeal.

3. The Superintendent is responsible for making a determination on the appeal. The
Superintendent will conduct_an impartial review of the appeal, including
consideration of the written record in the case, and may consult with legal counsel or
other school unit officials in making their decision.

4. The Superintendent will issue the appeal determination in writing within ten (10)
school days of receipt of the appeal, if feasible.

5. The Superintendent’s decision is final.

Section 3. Recordkeeping
The Affirmative Action Officer/Title IX Coordinator shall maintain a record of documents and
action in each case, and records of trainings provided, for a period of seven (7) years.
Cross References: AC — Nondiscrimination/Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action
ACAB — Harassment of Emplovees
ACAB-R1 — Employee Discrimination and Harassment Complaint
Procedure
ACAB-R2 — Employee Sex Discrimination/Harassment Complaint
Procedure
JIE - Preenant Students
16